arXiv:1210.6271v2  [math.AP]  23 Oct 2014
EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES
IN STEADY EULER FLOWS
ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Abstract. W e prove the existence of knotted and linked thin vortex tube s for
steady solutions to the incompressible Euler equation in R3. More precisely,
given a ﬁnite collection of (possibly linked and knotted) di sjoint thin tubes
in R3, we show that they can be transformed with a Cm-small diﬀeomorphism
into a set of vortex tubes of a Beltrami ﬁeld that tends to zero at inﬁnity.
The structure of the vortex lines in the tubes is extremely ri ch, presenting a
positive-measure set of invariant tori and inﬁnitely many p eriodic vortex lines.
The problem of the existence of steady knotted thin vortex tu bes can be traced
back to Lord Kelvin.
Keywords: Euler equation, invariant tori, KAM theory, knots, Beltram i
ﬁelds, Runge-type approximation.
MSC 2010: 35Q31, 37N10, 37J40, 35J25, 37C55, 57M25.
Contents
1. Introduction 2
2. Strategy of the proof and guide to the paper 5
3. Geometry of thin tubes 10
4. Estimates for the Neumann Laplacian in thin tubes 11
4.1. Estimates for derivatives with respect to the “slow” variable 13
4.2. Estimates for the “fast” variables 14
4.3. Pointwise estimates 19
5. Harmonic ﬁelds in thin tubes 20
6. Beltrami ﬁelds with prescribed harmonic part 23
6.1. An existence result for the curl operator 23
6.2. Estimates for an equation with constant coeﬃcients 26
6.3. Estimates for Beltrami ﬁelds in thin tubes 30
7. A KAM theorem for Beltrami ﬁelds with small λ 33
7.1. Trajectories of the local Beltrami ﬁeld 34
7.2. Rotation number of the Poincar´ e map of the local Beltrami ﬁeld 39
7.3. The nondegeneracy condition for the Poincar´ e map 42
7.4. A KAM theorem for generic tubes 47
8. Approximation by Beltrami ﬁelds with decay 53
12 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
9. Proof of the main theorem 57
10. A comment about the Navier–Stokes equation 59
Acknowledgments 60
References 60
1. Introduction
The motion of particles in an ideal ﬂuid in R3 is described by its velocity ﬁeld
u(x,t ), which satisﬁes the Euler equation
∂tu + (u · ∇)u = −∇P , divu = 0
for some pressure function P (x,t ). Equivalently, the ﬁeld u satisﬁes the equation
−∂tu +u ×ω = ∇B, divu = 0,
where the ﬁeld ω := curl u is the vorticity and B := P + 1
2 |u|2 is the Bernoulli
function. The trajectories (or integral curves) of the vorticity ω(x,t ) for ﬁxed t are
usually called vortex lines . A solution u to the Euler equation is called steady when
it does not depend on time.
A domain in R3 that is the union of vortex lines and whose boundary is an em-
bedded torus is a (closed) vortex tube . The analysis of thin vortex tubes, in a sense
to be speciﬁed below, for solutions to the Euler equation has attrac ted considerable
attention. A long-standing problem in this direction is Lord Kelvin’s con jecture [28]
that knotted and linked thin vortex tubes can arise in steady solutio ns to the Eu-
ler equation. This conjecture was motivated by results due to Helmh oltz on the
time-dependent case, which hinge on the mechanism of vorticity tra nsport, and
Maxwell’s observations of what he called “water twists”.
Kelvin’s conjecture is basically a question on the existence of knotte d invariant
tori in steady solutions of the Euler equation. There is a considerab le body of
literature devoted to the analysis of topological and geometrical s tructures that
appear in ﬂuid ﬂows, which has led to signiﬁcant results e.g. on particle trajectories
and vortex lines [2, 13, 21, 11, 25], on the relationship between the E uler equation
and the group of volume-preserving diﬀeomorphisms [2, 10, 19, 6], a nd on the
connection of the helicity with the energy functional and the asymp totic linking
number [3, 16, 17, 29]. However, Kelvin’s conjecture remains wide op en, and indeed
has been included as a major open problem in topological ﬂuid mechanic s in the
surveys [27, 23].
There is strong numerical evidence of the existence of thin vortex tubes, both in
the case of steady and time-dependent ﬂuid ﬂows. As a matter of f act, thin vortex
tubes have long played a key role in the construction and numerical e xploration of
possible blow-up scenarios for the Euler equation, which in turn has le d to rigorous
results such as [7, 9]. A particularly inﬂuential scenario in this directio n is [26],
which discusses how an initial condition with a certain set of linked thin v ortex
tubes might lead to singularity formation in ﬁnite time. As a side remark , let us
point out that thin vortex tubes of complicated knot topologies hav e been recently
constructed experimentally in the ﬂuid mechanics laboratory at the University of
Chicago [20].EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 3
Our aim in this paper is to prove that there exist steady solutions to t he Euler
equation in R3 having thin vortex tubes of any link and knot type. The steady
solutions we construct are Beltrami ﬁelds , that is, they satisfy the equation
curlu =λu
in R3 for some nonzero real constant λ. As any Beltrami ﬁeld satisﬁes the equation
∆ u = −λ2u in R3, it is apparent that the solutions we construct are real analytic
but do not have ﬁnite energy (i.e., u is not in L2(R3)). However, our construction
yields solutions with optimal decay at inﬁnity in the class of Beltrami ﬁe lds, which
fall oﬀ as |u(x)|<C/ |x|. In particular, they are in Lp(R3) for all p> 3.
The motivation to consider the class of Beltrami solutions to the Eule r equation
to address the existence of linked vortex tubes comes from Arnold ’s structure the-
orem [4, Theorem II.1.2]. Under mild technical assumptions, this theo rem ensures
that the vortex lines of a steady solution to the Euler equation whos e velocity ﬁeld
is not everywhere collinear with its vorticity are nicely stacked in a rigid structure
akin to those appearing in the study of integrable Hamiltonian system s. Heuristi-
cally, this structure should somehow restrict the way the vortex lin es are arranged;
partial results in this direction have been shown in [12], where it is prov ed that
under appropriate (strong) hypotheses the vortex lines of stea dy solutions with
non-collinear velocity and vorticity can only be of certain knot types . In contrast,
using Beltrami ﬁelds we have recently managed to produce steady s olutions of the
Euler equation with a set of vortex lines diﬀeomorphic to any locally ﬁnit e link [11].
Before stating the main result we need some deﬁnitions. We will say th at a
bounded domain of R3 is a (closed) tube if its boundary is a smoothly embedded
torus. Therefore, a vortex tube is a tube whose boundary is the u nion of vortex
lines (or, equivalently, its boundary is an invariant torus of the vort icity ﬁeld). A
convenient way of constructing thin tubes is as metric neighborhoods of curves.
Indeed, if γ ⊂ R3 is a closed curve, we will denote by
(1.1) Tǫ(γ) :=
{
x ∈ R3 : dist(x,γ )<ǫ
}
the tube of core γ and thickness ǫ. We are interested in the case where ǫ is a small
positive number, which corresponds to the case of thin tubes. Obv iously any ﬁnite
collection of disjoint tubes in R3 can be isotoped to a collection of thin tubes of
this form.
Let us consider a ﬁnite collection of (possibly knotted and linked) disj oint thin
tubes, constructed using metric neighborhoods of curves as abo ve. Our main result
in this paper is that, if the thickness of the tubes is small enough, th is collection
can be transformed by a Cm-small diﬀeomorphism into a union of vortex tubes of
a Beltrami ﬁeld in R3. Furthermore, the structure of the vortex lines inside each
vortex tube is extremely rich: ﬁrstly, the boundary of each vorte x tube is far from
being the only invariant torus of the ﬂow, as the set of invariant tor i has positive
Lebesgue measure. Secondly, between any pair of these invariant tori there are
inﬁnitely many periodic vortex lines. Thirdly, there is a periodic vortex line which
is close to the core of the initial tube and diﬀeomorphic to it. More pre cisely, we
have the following statement, where (as always henceforth) all th e diﬀeomorphisms
are assumed smooth, and all curves and surfaces are smoothly em bedded in R3. It
should be emphasized that the thinness of the tubes is crucially used in the proof
of the theorem.4 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Theorem 1.1. Letγ1,...,γ N beN pairwise disjoint (possibly knotted and linked)
closed curves in R3. For small enough ǫ, one can transform the collection of pairwise
disjoint thin tubes Tǫ(γ1),..., Tǫ(γN ) by a diﬀeomorphism Φ of R3, arbitrarily close
to the identity in any Cm norm, so that Φ[ Tǫ(γ1)],..., Φ[ Tǫ(γN )] are vortex tubes of
a Beltrami ﬁeld u, which satisﬁes the equation curlu =λu in R3 for some nonzero
constantλ.
Moreover, the ﬁeld u decays at inﬁnity as |Dju(x)| < Cj/|x| for all j and has
the following properties in each vortex tube Φ[ Tǫ(γi)]:
(i) In the interior of Φ[ Tǫ(γi)] there are uncountably many nested tori invari-
ant under the Beltrami ﬁeld u. On each of these invariant tori, the ﬁeld u
is ergodic.
(ii) The set of invariant tori has positive Lebesgue measure in a s mall neigh-
borhood of the boundary ∂Φ[ Tǫ(γi)].
(iii) In the region bounded by any pair of these invariant tori ther e are inﬁnitely
many closed vortex lines, not necessarily of the same knot ty pe as the
curve γi.
(iv) The image of the core curve γi under the diﬀeomorphism Φ is a periodic
vortex line of u.
An important property of the structure of the vortex lines inside e ach vortex
tube, as described above, is that it is stable in the following sense: on the one hand,
it is robust under small perturbations of the ﬁeld u, meaning that the trajectories
of any ﬁeld which is close enough to u in a suﬃciently high Ck norm have the
same structure. On the other hand, the boundary of each vorte x tube ∂Φ[ Tǫ(γi)]
is Lyapunov-stable under the ﬂow of the Beltrami ﬁeld u. It should be noticed too
that from Property (iv) in Theorem 1.1 we recover the main theorem of [11] for
ﬁnite links and improve it by ensuring that the solution falls oﬀ at inﬁnity (while
in [11] we had no control at all on the growth of the solution at inﬁnity ). Besides,
the proof of Theorem 1.1 shows that the vortex lines Φ( γi) are elliptic trajectories,
and therefore linearly stable, while the vortex lines we constructed in [11] were
hyperbolic, and thus unstable.
After establishing his structure theorem, Arnold conjectured [2] that, contrary
to what happens in the non-collinear case, Beltrami ﬁelds could pres ent vortex lines
of the same topological complexity as the trajectories of any diver gence-free vector
ﬁeld. By KAM theory, typically these trajectories give rise to a set o f invariant tori
with positive measure and chaotic regions with homoclinic tangles betw een these
tori. Theorem 1.1 is fully consistent with this picture, and proves the existence of
the aforementioned positive-measure set of invariant tori.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we will discuss the stra tegy of
the proof of Theorem 1.1. This section, which serves as a guide to th e paper, also
allows us to explain the key diﬃculties that appear in the proof of this r esult but
not in that of [11], which require the introduction of new techniques a nd ideas,
and make this paper considerably more involved. In Section 3 we intro duce some
objects associated with the geometry of a thin tube that will be use d throughout
the paper. In Section 4 we prove some estimates for the Laplacian in a thin tube
with Neumann boundary conditions. These estimates are used in Sec tion 5 to
study harmonic ﬁelds in thin tubes. In Section 6 we construct Beltra mi ﬁelds in
thin tubes with prescribed harmonic part. These ﬁelds are analyzed further inEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 5
Section 7, where we prove a KAM theorem for Beltrami ﬁelds in gener ic thin tubes.
A Runge-type approximation theorem by global Beltrami ﬁelds tend ing to zero at
inﬁnity is presented in Section 8. With all these ingredients, in Section 9 we prove
Theorem 1.1. The paper concludes with an easy application to the Nav ier–Stokes
equation, which we present in Section 10.
2. Strategy of the proof and guide to the paper
To prove Theorem 1.1, our basic goal is to establish the existence of a Beltrami
ﬁeld u, satisfying the equation
curlu =λu
in R3 for some nonzero constant λ and falling oﬀ at inﬁnity, such that the ﬁeld u has
a set of N invariant tori diﬀeomorphic to the surfaces {∂Tǫ(γi)}N
i=1, with {γi}N
i=1
being a set of prescribed (possibly knotted and linked) closed curve s. We recall
that Tǫ(γi) is a metric neighborhood of the curve γi of small thickness ǫ, as deﬁned
in Eq. (1.1). By deforming them a little if necessary, we can assume wit hout loss
of generality that the curves γi are analytic.
The basic idea behind the proof of Theorem 1.1 is carried out in three in terrelated
stages. Firstly, we construct a local Beltrami ﬁeld v, which satisﬁes the Beltrami
equation in a neighborhood of each closed tube
Tǫ(γi) and has a set of invariant
tori given by ∂Tǫ(γ1),...,∂ Tǫ(γN ). Secondly, we prove that these invariant tori are
“robust”, meaning that suitably small perturbations of the local Beltrami ﬁe ld v
still have a set of invariant tori diﬀeomorphic to ∂Tǫ(γ1),...,∂ Tǫ(γN ). To conclude,
we show that the local Beltrami ﬁeld v can be approximated in any Ck norm by
a global Beltrami ﬁeld u, which satisﬁes the Beltrami equation in the whole space
R3 and falls oﬀ at inﬁnity in an optimal way. The robustness of the invaria nt tori
of the local Beltrami ﬁeld ensure that u has a set of vortex tubes diﬀeomorphic to
the initial conﬁguration of thin tubes, and that in fact this diﬀeomor phism can be
taken close to the identity in a Cm norm.
However, the implementation of this basic idea turns out to be extre mely subtle.
To understand why, one can start by noticing that the robustnes s of the invariant
tori of the local Beltrami ﬁeld relies on a KAM-type argument. To ap ply this
KAM argument, we need a small perturbation parameter and some c ontrol on the
dynamics of the local Beltrami ﬁeld in a neighborhood of each invarian t torus,
which is required in order to show that the local Beltrami ﬁeld is equiva lent to a
Diophantine rotation on the torus and satisﬁes a suitable nondegen eracy condition.
To construct local Beltrami ﬁelds in a neighborhood of the tori ∂Tǫ(γi) with con-
trolled behavior on these surfaces, it is natural to use some varian t of the Cauchy–
Kowalewski theorem for the curl operator with Cauchy data on th e tori (e.g. [11,
Theorem 3.1]). This would lead to a local Beltrami ﬁeld deﬁned in a small n eigh-
borhood Ω i of each torus ∂Tǫ(γi). Unfortunately, the Runge-type approximation
theorem we prove in this paper does not allow us to approximate a loca l Beltrami
ﬁeld deﬁned in Ω 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ω N by a global Beltrami ﬁeld, since the complement
R3\(Ω 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ω N ) has compact connected components. As is well known, this
is not just a technical issue, but a fundamental obstruction in any Runge-type
theorem.6 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Therefore, to construct the local Beltrami ﬁeld v we will not consider a Cauchy
problem but a boundary value problem for the curl operator in each tube. This
leads to a vector ﬁeld that satisﬁes the Beltrami equation
curlv =λv
in a neighborhood of the tubes (because the boundaries are analyt ic), which allows
us to apply our Runge-type approximation theorem. In this bounda ry value prob-
lem one can prescribe the normal component of v at each boundary ∂Tǫ(γi), so that
by setting it to zero we can ensure that each boundary is an invarian t torus of the
local Beltrami ﬁeld. However, we have no control on the tangentia l component of
v on each torus, so in principle the local Beltrami ﬁeld does not necess arily satisfy
the dynamical conditions our KAM-type theorem requires for the in variant tori to
be preserved under small perturbations.
To overcome this diﬃculty we resort to a careful analysis of harmon ic ﬁelds in
thin tubes. Indeed, we show that in the above boundary value prob lem for the
local Beltrami ﬁeld, one can also prescribe its harmonic part (that is , the L2 pro-
jection of v into the space of harmonic ﬁelds with tangency boundary conditions ),
and for small λ one expects the local Beltrami ﬁeld to behave essentially as if it
were harmonic. Hence, we exploit the small parameter ǫ (that is, the thickness of
the tubes) to extract detailed analytic information about harmonic ﬁelds through
energy estimates, and then utilize this knowledge to compute the dy namical prop-
erties of the local Beltrami ﬁeld that are required in the KAM-type t heorem under
the assumption that the Beltrami parameter λ is suitably small (in fact, of order
ǫ3). A key ingredient in the computation of these dynamical propertie s is a set of
energy estimates for the local Beltrami ﬁelds and all its derivatives that are optimal
with respect to the geometry of the tubes, i.e., the parameter ǫ.
The local Beltrami ﬁeld can now be approximated in any Ck norm by a global
Beltrami ﬁeld u that falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as C/|x| using a Runge-type theorem. When
using the KAM argument to guarantee that u still has a set of invariant tori diﬀeo-
morphic to {∂Tǫ(γi)}, one has to face the problem that the local Beltrami ﬁeld is in
fact a small perturbation of a ﬁeld that does not satisfy the nondegeneracy condi-
tion (equivalent to a rotation of the disk with constant frequency) , which requires
a ﬁne analysis of the terms controlled by each small parameter: the thicknessǫ, the
Beltrami constant λ and the error in the Runge-type approximation.
We shall next present a sketch of the proof of Theorem 1.1, where we explain
the diﬀerent intermediate results that are needed in the demonstr ation and their
interrelations. This short sketch is also intended to serve as a guide to the paper.
For the sake of clarity, we will divide the proof in three stages:
Stage 1: Construction of the local Beltrami ﬁeld. The local Beltrami ﬁeld
v is obtained as the unique solution to certain boundary value problem f or the
Beltrami equation. Our goal is to estimate various analytic propert ies of this ﬁeld,
and for this it is natural to introduce coordinates adapted to a Fre net frame in each
tube Tǫ ≡ T ǫ(γi), which essentially correspond to an arc-length parametrization
of the curve γi and to rectangular coordinates in a transverse section of the tub e.
Thus we consider an angular coordinate α, taking values in S1
ℓ := R/ℓZ (withℓ the
length of the curve γi), and rectangular coordinates y = (y1,y 2) taking values in
the unit 2-disk D2. Details are given in Section 3 .EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 7
To extract information about the local Beltrami ﬁeld, a useful too l is the bound-
ary value problem for the Laplacian on scalar functions with zero mea n and zero
Neumann boundary conditions in the thin tube Tǫ:
∆ ψ =ρ in Tǫ, ∂ νψ|∂Tǫ = 0,
∫
Tǫ
ψdx = 0.
When written in the natural coordinates ( α,y ), we obtain a boundary value prob-
lem in the domain S1
ℓ × D2, the coeﬃcients of the Laplacian in these coordinates
depending on the geometry of the tube strongly through its thickn ess ǫ and the
curvature and torsion of the core curve γi.
It is clear that we have the H k estimate
‖ψ‖Hk(Tǫ) ⩽ Cǫ,k‖ρ‖Hk−2(Tǫ).
However this estimate, where the constant Cǫ,k depends on ǫ in an undetermined
way, is far from being enough to compute the dynamical quantities f or the local
Beltrami ﬁeld that are needed in the KAM-type theorem. Therefor e, in Section 4
we prove energy estimates for the function ψ and its derivatives that are optimal
with respect to the parameter ǫ. In particular, in order to be able to compute
the desired dynamical quantities for the local Beltrami ﬁeld later on , it is crucial
to distinguish between estimates for derivatives of ψ with respect to the “slow”
variable α and the “fast” variable y. The estimates for the function ψ and its
derivatives that we will need are stated in Theorem 4.11.
These estimates are immediately put to work in Section 5 to derive a perturbative
expression for the harmonic ﬁeld in each thin tube Tǫ and small ǫ. (Of course,
the problem degenerates for ǫ = 0 and the asymptotic results we prove do not
correspond to a Taylor expansion.) We will use the notation h for the harmonic
ﬁeld in Tǫ, which is unique up to a multiplicative constant. In fact, we need to
computeh up to corrections that are suitably small for small ǫ; as before, diﬀerent
powers of ǫ are required for the slow and fast components of the ﬁeld. To ﬁrst
order, the harmonic ﬁeld can be written in the coordinates ( α,y ) as
(2.1) h =∂α +τ (α) (y1∂2 −y2∂1) + O(ǫ),
where τ stands for the torsion of each curve γi and O(ǫ) denotes some vector
ﬁeld whose components in these coordinates are bounded by a multip le of ǫ in the
Ck(S1
ℓ × D2) norm. By Eq. (2.1), the ﬁeld h is an O(ǫ) perturbation of the rotation
of constant frequency given by the total torsion
∫ ℓ
0 τ (α)dα. From the point of view
of KAM theory, this is a very degenerate case, so it is not hard to gu ess that one
needs to compute h (at least) up to order O(ǫ3), as we do in Theorem 5.1. As a
matter of fact, we will see later on that the nondegeneracy condit ion that appears
in the KAM theorem is that a certain quantity, called the normal tors ion, must be
nonzero, and that it actually vanishes modulo terms of order O(ǫ2), which justiﬁes
why we need good estimates for h.
In Section 6 we show that, for any nonzero constant λ that is small enough (say,
smaller than some ﬁxed, ǫ-independent constant), there is a unique vector ﬁeld that
is tangent to the boundary of each tube Tǫ, satisﬁes the equation
(2.2) curl v =λv
in the tube and whose harmonic part (i.e., the L2 projection on the space of har-
monic ﬁelds) is h. (This is, of course, diﬀerent to what happens in the case of8 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
compact manifolds without boundary, where Beltrami ﬁelds are alwa ys orthogonal
to harmonic ﬁelds.) We also prove estimates that measure how the ﬁe ldv becomes
close to h in the Ck norm for small ǫ and λ. The key result is Theorem 6.8, which
will be crucial in verifying the conditions in the KAM argument for the p reservation
of invariant tori.
Stage 2: Preservation of the invariant tori. In Stage 1, for small enough ǫ
and λ, we have constructed a local Beltrami ﬁeld v, which satisﬁes Eq. (2.2) in
a neighborhood of ⋃ N
i=1
Tǫ(γi) and has a set of invariant tori given by ∂Tǫ(γi).
Furthermore, the estimates we have proved provide a very conve nient expression
for the local Beltrami ﬁeld, up to terms that are of order ǫ3 (when λ = ǫ3) in a
suitable sense.
In Section 7 we analyze the robustness of the invariant tori using the Poincar´ e
map Π deﬁned by the local Beltrami ﬁeld at a transverse section of e ach tube. In
each tube, Π is then a diﬀeomorphism of the disk that preserves cer tain measure,
while the intersection of each invariant torus with the transverse s ection is an in-
variant circle of the Poincar´ e map. The persistence of the invarian t tori will rely
on a KAM theorem for the Poincar´ e map (Theorem 7.6) that applies t o individual
invariant circles.
To apply the KAM theorem, one has to verify that the rotation numb er of Π on
the invariant circle is Diophantine and that Π satisﬁes a nondegenera cy condition
(namely, that its normal torsion is nonzero). Computing these dyn amical quantities
using the estimates for the local Beltrami ﬁeld is nontrivial. On the on e hand, the
rotation number depends on the behavior of the trajectories for arbitrarily large
times, so a delicate treatment is required in order to control unifor mly the eﬀect of
the O(ǫ2) terms in the vector ﬁeld. On the other hand, the normal torsion, which
is required to be nonzero, turns out to be zero modulo O(ǫ2), since the Poincar´ e
map is a small perturbation of a constant frequency rotation of th e disk, which is
a highly degenerate case from the point of view of KAM theory.
The estimates proved at Stage 1 are tailored to permit us to overco me these diﬃ-
culties, yielding expressions for the rotation number ωΠ and the normal torsion NΠ
that depend on the geometry of each curve γi through its curvature κ and torsion τ
(see Theorems 7.4 and 7.8):
ωΠ =
∫ ℓ
0
τ (α)dα + O(ǫ2),
NΠ = − 5πǫ2
8
∫ ℓ
0
κ(α)2τ (α)dα + O(ǫ3).
These expressions allow us to prove the main result in this Stage 2, wh ich is that
for “generic” curves γi the hypotheses of the aforementioned KAM theorem are
satisﬁed, so that the invariant tori of the local Beltrami ﬁeld v are robust: if u is a
divergence-free vector ﬁeld in a neighborhood of the tubes that is close enough to v
in a suitable sense (e.g., in a high enough Ck norm), then u also has an invariant
tube diﬀeomorphic to each Tǫ(γi), and moreover the corresponding diﬀeomorphisms
can be taken close to the identity. This is proved in Theorem 7.10.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 9
Stage 3: Approximation by a global Beltrami ﬁeld. In Section 8 we prove a
Runge-type approximation theorem for Beltrami ﬁelds that decay at inﬁnity (The-
orem 8.3). More precisely, we will show that the local Beltrami ﬁeld v, considered
in the previous stages and deﬁned in a neighborhood of the thin tube s Tǫ(γi), can
be approximated in any Ck norm by a Beltrami ﬁeld u that falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as
|Dju(x)|<C j/|x|. This decay is optimal for the class of Beltrami ﬁelds.
The proof of this theorem consists of two steps. In the ﬁrst step we use functional-
analytic methods to approximate the ﬁeld ﬁeld v by an auxiliary vector ﬁeld w that
satisﬁes the elliptic equation ∆ w = −λ2w in a large ball of R3 that contains all
the tubes. In the second step, we deﬁne the approximating global Beltrami ﬁeld u
in terms of a truncation of a suitable series representation of the ﬁ eld w, ensuring
thatu has the desired fall-oﬀ at inﬁnity.
Completion of the proof of the main theorem. In Section 9 we use all
previous results to complete the proof of Theorem 1.1. Indeed, fr om the robustness
of the invariant tori of the local Beltrami ﬁeld, it immediately follows t hat the
global Beltrami ﬁeld u has a set of thin vortex tubes equivalent through a Cm-
small diﬀeomorphism Φ to {Tǫ(γi)}, provided ǫ is small enough. More precisely,
what is proved is that there is some constant ǫ0, which depends only (albeit in
a rather nontrivial way) on the geometry of the curves γi and on the allowed
smallness for the diﬀeomorphism Φ, so that the statement of the th eorem holds for
any thickness ǫ ⩽ ǫ0.
The remaining properties of the vortex lines stated in Theorem 1.1 ar e established
in this section too, using results derived throughout the paper. In particular, we
show that near the curve γi there is an elliptic periodic trajectory of the ﬁeld u.
As a side remark, notice that this elliptic periodic trajectory is obviou sly linearly
stable, but is not granted a priori to be Lyapunov stable. Therefore, as shown by
the counterexample of Anosov and Katok (cf. e.g. [14]), it is not gua ranteed that
there are invariant tori of the ﬁeld in a neighborhood of the elliptic tr ajectory. A
careful (and nontrivial) analysis of the dynamics near the elliptic tra jectory for
small ǫ and λ would be required to prove the existence of these tori.
Before beginning with the technical part of the paper, it is convenie nt to provide
a short comparison between the proof of Theorem 1.1 and that of t he main theorem
in Ref. [11], where we showed that there are steady solutions to the Euler equation
with a set of vortex lines diﬀeomorphic to any given link. In this refere nce, the
proof was also based on the construction of a local Beltrami ﬁeld wit h a “robust”
set of periodic trajectories, which was then approximated by a glob al Beltrami ﬁeld.
However, the implementation of this basic principle is totally diﬀerent.
To begin with, the robustness of periodic trajectories in [11] relies o n the hy-
perbolic permanence theorem (which is essentially an application of th e implicit
function theorem) instead of a considerably more sophisticated KA M argument.
To construct a local Beltrami ﬁeld with prescribed periodic traject oriesγi that are
hyperbolic, as required by the permanence theorem, it is enough to prove a suitable
analog of the Cauchy–Kowalewski theorem for the curl operator : indeed, since the
ﬁeld is divergence-free, it is enough to assume that the ﬁeld used as Cauchy datum
is exponentially contracting into the curve γi on the Cauchy surface to obtain a10 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
local Beltrami ﬁeld that has γi as a hyperbolic periodic trajectory. All this is in
strong contrast with the case of vortex tubes, where the const ruction of the lo-
cal solution with a robust set of prescribed invariant tori requires the analysis of
the boundary value problem and the KAM argument described in Stag es 1 and 2
(Sections 4 to 7).
The approximation theorem we use in this paper is also diﬀerent from t he one
employed in [11]. The reason for this is that in [11] we had no control on the growth
of the global Beltrami ﬁeld at inﬁnity, even in the case of connected links. On the
contrary, the approximation theorem we prove in this paper (Theo rem 8.3) yields
Beltrami ﬁelds with optimal fall-oﬀ at inﬁnity. The proof of these app roximation
theorems is considerably diﬀerent: the old theorem is based on an ite rative scheme
that uses a theorem by Lax and Malgrange and works for the curl o perator in any
Riemannian 3-manifold, while the new one is based on diﬀerent principles and takes
advantage of the geometry of Euclidean 3-space to ensure that t he global Beltrami
ﬁeld falls oﬀ at inﬁnity.
Notice that the main theorem in [11] applies to locally ﬁnite sets of curv es, while
in Theorem 1.1 in this paper we can only take ﬁnite sets of curves γ1,...,γ N . Some
comments in this regard are made in Remark 9.2.
3. Geometry of thin tubes
In this section we introduce some notation, including a coordinate sy stem, that
will be used throughout the paper to describe functions and vecto r ﬁelds deﬁned
on thin tubes. These tubes will be characterized in terms of the cur ve that sits on
its core and its thickness ǫ, which is a parameter that will be everywhere assumed
to be suitably small.
Let us start with a closed analytic curve with an arc-length paramet rization
γ : S1
ℓ → R3, with S1
ℓ := R/ℓZ (throughout the paper, when the period is 2 π we
will simply write S1 ≡ S1
2π). This amounts to saying that the tangent ﬁeld ˙ γ has
unit norm and ℓ is the length of the curve. We will abuse the notation and denote
also by γ the curve parametrized by the above map (i.e., the image set γ(S1
ℓ )).
Let us denote by Tǫ ≡ T ǫ(γ) a metric neighborhood with thickness ǫ of the
curveγ, that is,
Tǫ :=
{
x ∈ R3 : dist(x,γ )<ǫ
}
.
This is a thin tube having the curve γ as its core. It is standard that, for small ǫ, the
boundary ∂Tǫ is analytic. The normal bundle of the curve γ being trivial [22], one
can associate to each α ∈ S1
ℓ two orthogonal unit vectors ej(α) in R3 perpendicular
to the curve at the point γ(α). For convenience, we will make the assumption that
the curvature of the curve γ does not vanish, which allows us to take e1(α),e 2(α)
as the normal and binormal vectors at the point γ(α). It is well known that the
assumption that the curvature does not vanish is satisﬁed for gen eric curves [5,
p. 184] (roughly speaking, “generic” refers to an open and dense set, with respect
to a reasonable Ck topology, in the space of smooth curves in R3).
Using the vector ﬁelds ej(α) and denoting by D2 the two-dimensional unit disk,
we can introduce analytic coordinates ( α,y ) ∈ S1
ℓ × D2 in the tube Tǫ via the
diﬀeomorphism
(α,y ) ↦→γ(α) +ǫy1e1(α) +ǫy2e2(α).EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 11
In the coordinates (α,y ), a short computation using the Frenet formulas shows that
the Euclidean metric in the tube reads as
(3.1) ds2 =Adα 2 + 2ǫ2τ (y2dy1 −y1dy2)dα +ǫ2(
dy2
1 +dy2
2
)
,
where κ ≡κ(α) and τ ≡τ (α) respectively denote the curvature and torsion of the
curve,
(3.2) A := (1 −ǫκy1)2 + (ǫτ )2|y|2,
and |y| stands for the Euclidean norm of y = (y1,y 2). As is customary, we will
denote by gij and gij the components of the metric tensor and its inverse, respec-
tively.
We will sometimes take polar coordinates r ∈ (0, 1), θ ∈ S1 := R/2πZ in the
disk D2, which are deﬁned so that
y1 =r cosθ, y 2 =r sinθ.
The metric then reads
(3.3) ds2 =Adα 2 − 2ǫ2τr 2dθdα +ǫ2dr2 +ǫ2r2dθ2,
where we, with a slight abuse of notation, still call A the expression of (3.2) in
these coordinates, i.e.,
(3.4) A := (1 −ǫκr cosθ)2 + (ǫτr )2.
Notice that the coordinate r is simply the distance to the curve γ. For future
reference, we record that the volume measure is written in these c oordinates as
(3.5) dV :=Bdαdy =Brdαdrdθ
up to a factor of ǫ2, where dy :=dy1dy2 and
(3.6) B := 1 −ǫκy1 = 1 −ǫκr cosθ.
4. Estimates for the Neumann Laplacian in thin tubes
In this section we will derive some estimates for the Laplace equation ∆ ψ =ρ in
the thin tube Tǫ with zero Neumann boundary conditions. As we will see, to gain
control on the function ψ it is convenient to attack this equation in the coordinates
(α,y ) ∈ S1
ℓ × D2 that we introduced in Section 3, in terms of which the Laplace
equation can be written as
(4.1a) ∆ ψ =ρ in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ νψ = 0 on S1
ℓ ×∂D2,
where the Laplacian ∆ is now interpreted as an ǫ-dependent diﬀerential operator
in the variables ( α,y ) or ( α,r,θ ). In order to ensure the existence of solutions to
this equation, we suppose that
∫
ρdV = 0, which allows us to uniquely determine
the solution ψ by demanding that it also has zero mean:
(4.1b)
∫
ψdαdy = 0.
(Here and in what follows, we omit the domain of integration when it is th e whole
domain S1
ℓ × D2. We could have used the measure dV in the above formula too,12 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
but this choice is slightly more convenient.) For future reference, w e record here
the expression of ∆ in the variables ( α,r,θ ):
∆ ψ = 1
ǫ2
(
ψrr + 1
rψr + A
r2B2ψθθ
)
+ 1
B2ψαα + 2τ
B2ψαθ + τ ′ −ǫr(κτ ′ −κ′τ ) cosθ
B3 ψθ
+ 1
ǫ
( κ sinθ(B2 − (ǫτr )2)
rB3 ψθ − κ cosθ
B ψr
)
+ ǫr(κ′ cosθ −τκ sinθ)
B3 ψα.
(4.2)
As usual, we denote partial derivatives by subscripts when there is not risk of
confusion.
Given a subset Ω ⊂ S1
ℓ × D2, we will use the notation
‖ψ‖Ω :=
( ∫
Ω
ψ2dαdy
) 1/2
for the L2(Ω)-norm of the function ψ, omitting the subscript when Ω is the whole
domain S1
ℓ × D2. In this section we will use the notation
(4.3) ‖ψ‖2
˙H1ǫ
:= ‖∂αψ‖2 + ‖Dyψ‖2
ǫ2
for a homogeneous Sobolev norm in which the derivatives associated with the “small
directions” of the thin tube are weighted with an appropriate ǫ-dependent factor.
The usual H k norm of the function ψ(α,y ) will be denoted by ‖ψ‖Hk .
In what follows, we will assume that ψ is a solution of the Laplace equation (4.1)
with zero mean and zero Neumann boundary conditions, which ensur es that
(4.4)
∫
gij∂iψ∂ jϕdV = −
∫
ρϕdV
for any ϕ ∈H 1(S1
ℓ × D2). As usual, the scripts i,j range over the set of coordinates
{α,y 1,y 2}, and summation over repeated indices is understood. It is importan t to
notice that, for any function ϕ,
(4.5)
∫
gij∂iϕ∂ jϕdV =
(
1 + O(ǫ)
)
‖ϕ‖2
˙H1ǫ
,
so that the ˙H 1
ǫ norm is essentially a more convenient way of dealing with the natural
˙H 1 norm associated with the metric. We will use this identity many times in t his
section without further comment.
The structure of this section is the following. We will start by estimat ing the
L2 norm of the derivatives of the function ψ with respect to the “slow” variable α
(Subsection 4.1). The proof of these estimates is standard. We re call that the reason
whyα is called the slow variable is that it parametrizes the “large” direction o f the
thin tube Tǫ, as opposed to the “fast” variable y, which is obtained by rescaling
the small section of the tube. Estimates for the derivatives of ψ with respect to the
“fast” variable y with optimal dependence in the small parameter ǫ are presented
in Subsection 4.2. They are more complicated to obtain, basically beca use one has
to consider an auxiliary function in order to get rid of the contributio ns to ψ that
only depend on the slow variable. The resulting estimates for ψ, which we will
often use in forthcoming sections, will be stated in Subsection 4.3.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 13
4.1. Estimates for derivatives with respect to the “slow” variab le. In this
subsection we will prove H k estimates for the derivatives of the function ψ with
respect to the “slow” variable α (cf. Proposition 4.3). We will begin with the
following proposition, where we estimate the L2 and ˙H 1
ǫ norms of the function
ψ. As is customary, throughout this article we will use the letter C to denote
ǫ-independent constants that may vary from line to line.
Proposition 4.1. The function ψ satisﬁes the estimate
‖ψ‖ + ‖ψ‖ ˙H1
ǫ
⩽ C‖ρ‖.
Proof. By the expression of the metric in the coordinates ( α,y ), it is clear that for
small enough ǫ one has
∫
gij∂iψ∂ jψdV /greaterorequalslant
(
1 +O(ǫ)
) ∫ (
ψ2
α + |Dyψ|2
ǫ2
)
dαdy /greaterorequalslant1
2
∫ (
ψ2
α + |Dyψ|2)
dαdy.
The rightmost term in the inequality is bounded from below by 1
2µ1‖ψ‖2, where µ1
stands for the ﬁrst nonzero Neumann eigenvalue of the ﬂat solid to rus:
µ1 := inf
{ ∫ (
ϕ2
α+|Dyϕ|2)
dαdy :ϕ ∈C∞(S1
ℓ ×D2),
∫
ϕdαdy = 0, ‖ϕ‖ = 1
}
> 0.
Hence we infer that
(4.6) ‖ψ‖ ⩽ C‖ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
for some C >0.
To conclude, we can now use the weak formulation of the equation (4 .4) with
ϕ =ψ and the Cauchy–Schwartz inequality to derive that
‖ψ‖2
˙H1ǫ
⩽
(
1 + O(ǫ)
) ∫
gij∂iψ∂ jψdV ⩽
(
1 + O(ǫ)
)
‖ρ‖‖ψ‖ ⩽ C‖ρ‖‖ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
.
The proposition then follows from this inequality and the estimate (4.6 ). □
In the following lemma we record an elementary inequality that will be of use
several times in this section.
Lemma 4.2. LetDl
α,y denote the tensor of lth order derivatives with respect to the
variables (α,y ). For any well-behaved (e.g., smooth) functions ϕ, ˜ϕ,χ, ˜χ on S1
ℓ ×D2,
one has
∫ ⏐
⏐Dl
α,y(Bg ij)∂iϕ∂ j ˜ϕχ ˜χ
⏐
⏐dαdy ⩽ ǫCl
( ∫
gij∂iϕ∂ jϕχdV
) 1
2
( ∫
gij∂i ˜ϕ∂ j ˜ϕ ˜χdV
) 1
2
.
In particular,
∫ ⏐
⏐Dl
α,y(Bg ij)∂iϕ∂ j ˜ϕ
⏐
⏐dαdy ⩽ Clǫ‖ϕ‖ ˙H1ǫ
‖ ˜ϕ‖ ˙H1ǫ
.
Proof. It is an immediate consequence of the expression for the metric and the
function B in the coordinates ( α,y ) (see Eq. (3.1)) and the Cauchy–Schwartz in-
equality. □
We are now ready to prove the estimates for the derivatives of ψ with respect to
the slow variable α that we will need in this paper:14 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Proposition 4.3. The kth partial derivative of the function ψ with respect to the
angle α satisﬁes
‖∂k+1
α ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk,
wherek is any nonnegative integer.
Proof. Let us take ϕ =ψαα in Eq. (4.4) and integrate by parts to get
∫
gij∂iψα∂jψαdV =
∫
ρψααdV −
∫
∂α(Bg ij)∂iψ∂ jψαdαdy.
The LHS is bounded from below by (1 + O(ǫ))‖ψα‖2
˙H1ǫ
, while from the deﬁnition of
the norm ˙H 1
ǫ and Lemma 4.2 it stems that
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
ρψααdV
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ ⩽ (1 + O(ǫ)) ‖ρ‖ ‖ψα‖ ˙H1ǫ
,
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
∂α(Bg ij)∂iψ∂ jψαdαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ ⩽ Cǫ‖ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
‖ψα‖ ˙H1ǫ
.
Using Proposition 4.1 to estimate ‖ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
in terms of ‖ρ‖, we infer that
‖ψα‖2
˙H1
ǫ
⩽ C‖ρ‖‖ψα‖ ˙H1ǫ
,
which readily implies the desired bound for k = 0. When k is a positive integer, the
proof is totally analogous and can be obtained by induction on k usingϕ =∂2k+2
α ψ,
the only diﬀerence being that one needs to estimate the term
∫
ρϕ as
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
ρ∂ 2k+2
α ψdV
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ ⩽ C‖ρ‖Hk
k+1∑
j=1
‖∂j
αψ‖ ˙H1
ǫ
⩽ C‖ρ‖2
Hk +C‖ρ‖Hk ‖∂k+1
α ψ‖ ˙H1
ǫ
by the induction hypothesis. □
4.2. Estimates for the “fast” variables. To estimate the derivates with respect
to the “fast” variable y in an optimal way, it is crucial to ensure that the terms that
only depend on α are not considered when estimating the norms of the function.
A convenient way of doing this is by considering the auxiliary function
(4.7) ¯ψ(α,y ) := ψ(α,y ) − 1
π
∫
D2
ψ(α,y ′)dy′,
which is obtained from ψ by subtracting its average in the fast variable. It should
be emphasized that, if we were not to subtract this average, the e stimates we would
obtain would not be strong enough for our needs in later sections. T he key estimate
in this subsection is Theorem 4.8.
An immediate observation is that, of course
(4.8) Dj
y∂k
αψ =Dj
y∂k
α ¯ψ
whenever the number j of derivatives we take with respect to y is greater than zero,
and that ¯ψ has zero mean: ∫
¯ψdαdy = 0.
Moreover, the function ¯ψ satisﬁes the equation
∆ ¯ψ = ¯ρ in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ ν ¯ψ = 0 on S1
ℓ ×∂D2,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 15
with
¯ρ(α,y ) := ρ(α,y ) − 1
π ∆
∫
D2
ψ(α,y ′)dy′.
The estimates for ψ we derive in the previous section guarantee that the norm
of ¯ρ can be bounded by a multiple of the norm of the initial source term ρ:
Proposition 4.4. The H k norm of ¯ρ is bounded by
‖ ¯ρ‖Hk ⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk.
Proof. Observe that the action of the Laplacian (which we compute in the co ordi-
nates (α,y )) on the function ψ(α,y ′) is
∆ ψ(α,y ′) =
(
1 + O(ǫ)
)
∂2
αψ(α,y ′) + O(ǫ)∂αψ(α,y ′),
where O(ǫn) here stands for an ǫ-dependent quantity Q(α,y ) bounded as
‖Q‖Hk ⩽ Ckǫn
for all k. Therefore, one ﬁnds that
‖Dj
y∂k
α ¯ρ‖ =
‖
‖
‖
‖Dj
y∂k
αρ − 1
πDj
y∂k
α∆
∫
D2
ψ(α,y ′)dy′
‖
‖
‖
‖
=
‖
‖
‖
‖Dj
y∂k
αρ − 1
π
∫
D2
∂k+2
α ψ(α,y ′)dy′ +
k+2∑
l=1
∫
D2
O(ǫ)∂l
αψ(α,y ′)dy′
‖
‖
‖
‖
⩽ ‖Dj
y∂k
αρ‖ + (1 +Cǫ)‖∂k+2
α ψ‖ +Cǫ
k+1∑
l=1
‖∂l
αψ‖
⩽ C‖ρ‖Hk,
where in the last step we have used Propositions 4.1 and 4.3. The claim t hen
follows. □
To derive energy estimates for ψ, we will use that one obviously has
(4.9)
∫
gij∂i ¯ψ∂ jϕdV = −
∫
¯ρϕdV
for all ϕ ∈ H 1(S1
ℓ × D2). Our ﬁrst result will be an estimate for the L2 norm
of ¯ψ and Dy ¯ψ. While we can readily derive a bound for these quantities using
Proposition 4.1, the estimates we prove here are much sharper for small ǫ. This
will be crucial in the derivation of optimal estimates for ψ.
Proposition 4.5. The function ¯ψ satisﬁes the H 1 estimates
‖ ¯ψ‖ + ‖Dy ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖, ‖∂α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖.
Proof. Choosingϕ = ¯ψ in Eq. (4.9) and in view of the expression of the coeﬃcients
of the metric (3.1), one immediately obtains that
(4.10) ‖ ¯ψ‖2
˙H1ǫ
⩽
(
1 + O(ǫ)
)
‖ ¯ρ‖‖ ¯ψ‖.
Since ¯ψ(α, ·) has zero mean in the disk D2 for any ﬁxed α, by Poincar´ e’s inequality
there is a positive constant C, independent of ǫ and α (namely, the ﬁrst nonzero
Neumann eigenvalue of the disk), such that∫
D2
⏐
⏐Dy ¯ψ(α,y )
⏐
⏐2
dy /greaterorequalslantC
∫
D2
¯ψ(α,y )2dy.16 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Integrating this inequality in α, the H 1 norm of ¯ψ can be estimated as
‖ ¯ψ‖2
˙H1ǫ
/greaterorequalslant1
ǫ2
∫ ⏐
⏐Dy ¯ψ(α,y )
⏐
⏐2
dydα /greaterorequalslantC
ǫ2 ‖ ¯ψ‖2.
Together with Eq. (4.10), this yields ‖ ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ ¯ρ‖ and ‖ ¯ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
⩽ Cǫ‖ ¯ρ‖, so the
claim follows directly from Proposition 4.4. □
It is particularly easy to derive preliminary estimates (which will be inst rumental
in the proof of Proposition 4.7) for the derivatives of ¯ψ with respect to α thanks to
Proposition 4.3. Notice these bounds will be substantially improved lat er on.
Proposition 4.6. The derivative of ¯ψ with respect to α satisﬁes
‖Dy∂k+1
α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖Hk, ‖∂k+2
α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk
for any nonnegative integer k.
Proof. The claim is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of ¯ψ (cf. Eq. (4.7))
and Proposition 4.3, since obviously the L2(S1
ℓ × D2) norm of the function
∂j
α
∫
D2
ψ(α,y ′)dy′
is bounded from above by C‖∂j
αψ‖, which was in turn estimated in the aforemen-
tioned proposition. □
We are ready to show that the second derivatives of ¯ψ with respect to the fast
variabley are bounded by a factor of order ǫ2. The proof of these estimates makes
essential use of Propositions 4.5 and 4.6.
Proposition 4.7. The second derivatives of the function ¯ψ with respect to the fast
coordinates are bounded by
‖D2
y ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖.
Proof. We will denote by D2
R the two-dimensional disk of radius R,R being a ﬁxed
real smaller than 1. Let us start by proving interior estimates. For this, we will
denote by ∂a the derivative along a y-direction (that is, ∂1 or ∂2), and consider a
smooth function χ(|y|) equal to 1 for |y|<R and equal to zero in a neighborhood
of ∂D2. Taking ϕ = ∂a(χ2∂a ¯ψ) in Eq. (4.9) (here and in what follows we will not
sum over the index a) and integrating by parts, one readily obtains
(4.11) I 2 :=
∫
gij∂i∂a ¯ψ∂ j∂a ¯ψχ 2dV =I1 −I2 −I3,
where
I1 :=
∫
¯ρ∂ a(χ2∂a ¯ψ)dV , I 2 :=
∫
∂a(Bg ij)∂i ¯ψ∂ j(χ2∂a ¯ψ)dαdy
I3 :=
∫
∂a ¯ψg ij∂j(χ2)∂i∂a ¯ψdV .
Let us estimate these integrals. The ﬁrst one can be easily controlle d using the
Cauchy–Schwartz inequality and Propositions 4.4 and 4.5:
|I1| ⩽
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
¯ρχ2∂2
a ¯ψdV
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐+
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
¯ρ∂ a(χ2)∂a ¯ψdV
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ ⩽ C‖ ¯ρ‖
(
‖χ∂ 2
a ¯ψ‖ + ‖∂a ¯ψ‖)
⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖I +Cǫ 2‖ρ‖2.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 17
The integral I2 can be controlled using an analogous argument, Lemma 4.2 and
Jensen’s inequality. This leads to the estimate
|I2| ⩽
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
∂a(Bg ij)χ2∂i ¯ψ∂ j∂a ¯ψdαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐+
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
∂a(Bg ij)∂i ¯ψ∂ j(χ2)∂a ¯ψdαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⩽ Cǫ‖ ¯ψ‖ ˙H1
ǫ
I +C‖∂a ¯ψ‖
( ∫ (
∂a(Bg ij)∂i ¯ψ∂ jχ
) 2
dαdy
) 1
2
⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖I +Cǫ 2‖ρ‖
∫ ⏐
⏐
⏐∂a(Bg ij)∂i ¯ψ∂ jχ
⏐
⏐
⏐dαdy
⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖I +Cǫ 3‖ρ‖‖ ¯ψ‖ ˙H1ǫ
‖χ‖ ˙H1ǫ
⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖I +Cǫ 3‖ρ‖2,
where in the fourth line we have used that ‖χ‖ ˙H1ǫ
= ‖Dyχ‖/ǫ = C/ǫ. A similar
argument shows that
|I3| ⩽ C‖∂a ¯ψ‖‖χ‖ ˙H1ǫ
I ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖I.
Feeding these bounds into Eq. (4.11), we obtain
I 2 ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖I +Cǫ 2‖ρ‖2,
so that I ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖. From the deﬁnition of the function χ and the identity (4.5) it
then follows that
(4.12) ‖D2
y ¯ψ‖S1
ℓ ×D2
R
⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖,
which is the desired interior estimate.
To prove the estimates up to the boundary, we begin by showing tha t the
˙H 1
ǫ norm of
∂θ ¯ψ ≡y1∂2 ¯ψ −y2∂1 ¯ψ
is bounded in terms of ‖ρ‖. For this, we will ﬁnd it convenient to take a smooth
function χ(|y|), equal to 1 for |y| > R and vanishing in a neighborhood of the
origin, and use polar coordinates throughout without further not ice. If we now
takeϕ =χ2 ¯ψθθ in Eq. (4.4) and integrate by parts, we readily ﬁnd that∫
gij∂i ¯ψθ∂j ¯ψθχ2dV =
∫
¯ρ ¯ψθθχ2dV −
∫
∂θ(Bg ij)∂i ¯ψ∂ j(χ2 ¯ψθ)dαdy
−
∫
gij∂i ¯ψθ ¯ψθ∂j(χ2)dV ,
where the indices i,j now range over the set {r,θ,α }. Notice that the reason we
are now using polar coordinates is that ∂θ does not commute with the derivatives
with respect to ( y1,y 2). Arguing as above, one ﬁnds that∫
gij∂i ¯ψθ∂j ¯ψθχ2dV ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖,
which ensures that
(4.13) ‖ ¯ψθθ‖S1
ℓ ×AR + ‖ ¯ψrθ‖S1
ℓ ×AR ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖,
where AR := D2\
D2
R is the annulus of inner radius R.
To estimate the derivative ¯ψrr, it now suﬃces to isolate this quantity in the
equation ∆ ¯ψ = ¯ρ. From the expression of the Laplacian in these coordinates (4.2)
it is apparent that for r>R one can write ¯ψrr as
ǫ−2 ¯ψrr − ¯ρ = O(ǫ−2)
(
| ¯ψθθ| + | ¯ψr|
)
+ O(ǫ−1) ¯ψθ + O(1)
(
| ¯ψαθ| + | ¯ψαα| + | ¯ψα|
)
.18 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
From Propositions 4.5–4.7 and the estimates (4.13), it then follows th at
‖ ¯ψrr‖S1
ℓ ×AR ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖.
This yields the desired boundary estimates, thus completing the pro of of the propo-
sition. □
The results we have established so far show that the derivatives of ¯ψ can be
bounded in terms of the source ρ as
‖ ¯ψ‖ + ‖Dy ¯ψ‖ + ‖D2
y ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖,(4.14a)
‖∂α ¯ψ‖ + ‖Dy∂α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖,(4.14b)
‖∂2
α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ C‖ρ‖.(4.14c)
However, having in mind applications in forthcoming sections,we would r ather have
estimates where the RHS always has a factor of ǫ2.
In the following theorem we show that this can be achieved by replacin g the
L2 norm of ρ by its H 1 norm (thus using estimates that are weaker in terms of the
gain of derivatives), and provide a generalization for higher derivat ives. It is worth
emphasizing that both the estimates (4.14) and those in the following theorem are
optimal with respect to its dependence on the small parameter ǫ, as can be checked
easily.
Theorem 4.8. For any nonnegative integers j and k we have the bound
‖Dj
y∂k
α ¯ψ‖ ⩽ Cjkǫ2‖ρ‖HJ+k,
whereJ := max{j − 2, 0}.
Proof. The proof proceeds by induction on J +k, that is, on the number of deriva-
tives in the RHS of the inequality. The case J +k = 0 follows from Propositions 4.5
and 4.7. To avoid cumbersome notations that might obscure the arg ument, we will
sketch the procedure for the case J +k = 1, where one has to estimate ∂α ¯ψ,Dy∂α ¯ψ
(improving the bounds in Propositions 4.5 and 4.6), D2
y∂α ¯ψ and D3
y ¯ψ. Once this
case has been worked out in detail, it is straightforward to prove th e general result
using an induction argument.
Let us begin by estimating the quantities having derivatives with resp ect to α,
that is, ∂α ¯ψ,Dy∂α ¯ψ andD2
y∂α ¯ψ. An easy computation using the expression of the
Laplacian (4.2) shows that the commutator
̺ := ∆( ∂α ¯ψ) −∂α(∆ ¯ψ)
can be written as
̺ = O(ǫ−1)D2
y ¯ψ + O(ǫ) ¯ψαα + O(1)Dy∂α ¯ψ + O(ǫ−1)Dy ¯ψ + O(ǫ) ¯ψα.
Now from the H 2 estimates proved in Propositions 4.5–4.7, one obtains that the
L2 norm of the commutator is bounded by
‖̺‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖ρ‖.
The function ∂α ¯ψ obviously satisﬁes the zero-mean condition
(4.15a)
∫
D2
∂α ¯ψ(α,y ′)dy′ = 0,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 19
the boundary condition
(4.15b) ∂ν(∂α ¯ψ) = 0
on S1
ℓ ×∂D2 and the equation
(4.15c) ∆( ∂α ¯ψ) = ∂α ¯ρ +̺.
As the L2 norm of the RHS is bounded by C‖ρ‖H1 , an immediate application
of Propositions 4.5 and 4.7 (applied to the boundary problem (4.15) ra ther than
to (4.1)) shows that
‖ ¯ψα‖ + ‖Dy ¯ψα‖ + ‖D2
y ¯ψα‖ ⩽ Cǫ 2‖ρ‖H1.
To estimateD3
y ¯ψ we will argue essentially as in the proof of Proposition 4.7. One
starts by proving interior estimates, which are obtained by feeding the test function
ϕ := ∂2
a(χ2∂2
a ¯ψ) in the identity (4.9). As before, χ(y) is a smooth function which
vanishes in a neighborhood of ∂D2 and is identically equal to 1 in a disk of radius R
and the script a (which is not summed) denotes any y direction. In order to get
boundary estimates, one can start by noticing that the same argu ment we have used
above to control derivatives with respect to α also works for ∂θ ¯ψ ≡y1∂2 ¯ψ −y2∂1 ¯ψ.
Indeed, the L2 norm of the commutator
˜̺ := ∆( ∂θ ¯ψ) −∂θ(∆ ¯ψ)
is also bounded by Cǫ‖ρ‖ as a consequence of Propositions 4.5–4.7, and besides
∂θ ¯ψ satisﬁes the boundary value problem
∆( ∂θ ¯ψ) = ∂θ ¯ρ + ˜̺ in S1
ℓ × D2,
∂ν (∂θ ¯ψ) = 0 on S1
ℓ ×∂D2,
∫
D2
∂θ ¯ψ(α,y ′)dy′ = 0.
It then follows that theL2 norm of the derivativesD2
y∂θ ¯ψ are bounded byCǫ 2‖ρ‖H1.
Hence one can now diﬀerentiate the equation ∆ ¯ψ = ¯ρ with respect to r and iso-
late∂3
r ¯ψ to show that the norm ‖∂3
r ¯ψ‖S1
ℓ ×AR in a neighborhood of the boundary is
bounded by Cǫ 2‖ρ‖H1, as claimed.
This proves the induction hypotheses for J +k = 1. For higher values of J +k, the
idea is exactly the same. Derivatives with respect to α (orθ) are dealt with by taking
derivatives directly in the equation and invoking the induction hypoth eses. To
estimates the highest derivative with respect to r, one combines interior estimates
with test function
ϕ =∂J+k+1
a (χ2∂J+k+1
a ¯ψ)
with the direct isolation of ∂J+k+2
r ¯ψ in the equation ∂J+k
r (∆ ¯ψ − ¯ρ) = 0. □
4.3. Pointwise estimates. Taking into account that Dy ¯ψ = Dyψ, we can com-
bine the results in the previous two subsections to obtain H k estimates for ψ in
which the derivatives with respect to the fast and slow variables are controlled in
terms of diﬀerent (and optimal) powers of ǫ. To begin with, we can put together
Propositions 4.3 and 4.6 and Theorem 4.8 to arrive at the following boun ds:
Theorem 4.9. The functions ψ and ¯ψ satisfy the H k estimate
‖ψ‖Hk+2 ⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk, ‖ ¯ψ‖Hk ⩽ Ckǫ2‖ρ‖Hk.
for any nonnegative integer k.20 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Remark 4.10. It is not hard to prove that these estimates are optimal with respe ct
to the dependence on ǫ. To have a rough idea of why this is true, the reader might
want to consider the problem
(4.16)
ψαα + ∆ yψ
ǫ2 =ρ in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ νψ = 0 on S1
ℓ ×∂D2,
∫
ψdαdy = 0,
which can be understood as a simpliﬁed version of the problem (4.1). H ere and in
what follows, ∆ yψ :=∂2
1ψ+∂2
2ψ stands for the standard Laplacian in the variables y.
For future reference, it is convenient to invoke the Sobolev embed ding theorem
and record the following estimate for the Ck norm of the function ψ:
Theorem 4.11. The function ψ satisﬁes the Ck estimates
‖ψ‖C k ⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk, ‖Dyψ‖C k ⩽ Ckǫ2‖ρ‖Hk+3
for any nonnegative integer k.
Proof. It follows immediately from Theorem 4.9 upon noticing that Dy ¯ψ = Dyψ
and using the Sobolev inequality ‖ϕ‖C k ⩽ C‖ϕ‖Hk+2. □
Remark 4.12. It is clear that the same bounds we have proved for the function ψ
hold true if we assume that ψ solves the model problem (4.16) instead of ∆ ψ =ρ.
In particular, for future reference we record here that this fun ction also satisﬁes the
estimates
(4.17) ‖ψ‖Hk+2 + ‖D2
yψ‖Hk
ǫ2 ⩽ Ck‖ρ‖Hk, ‖Dyψ‖Hk ⩽ Ckǫ2‖ρ‖Hk.
5. Harmonic fields in thin tubes
In this section we use the estimates proved in Section 4 to compute t he harmonic
ﬁeld in a thin tube up to terms that are suitably bounded for small ǫ.
We recall that a vector ﬁeld h in the tube Tǫ is harmonic if it is divergence-free,
irrotational, and tangent to the boundary. The vector space of a ll harmonic ﬁelds
in the tube will be denoted by
(5.1) H(Tǫ) :=
{
h ∈C∞(Ω, R3) : div h = 0, curlh = 0, h·ν = 0
}
.
It is standard that the space H(Tǫ) is one-dimensional, as it is isomorphic to the
ﬁrst cohomology group of the tube with real coeﬃcients.
Let us consider the vector ﬁeld in S1
ℓ × D2 deﬁned by
(5.2) h0 :=B−2(
∂α +τ∂ θ
)
.
It can be readily checked that h0 is irrotational (with respect to the metric (3.3))
and tangent to the boundary.
By the Hodge decomposition [15], there is a function ψ such that
(5.3) h :=h0 + ∇ψ
is harmonic. Clearly this is the only harmonic vector ﬁeld in S1
ℓ × D2 up to a
multiplicative constant. By ∇ψ we are denoting the gradient of the function ψEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 21
with respect to the metric (3.3), that is,
(5.4) ∇ψ = ψα +τψ θ
B2 ∂α + ψr
ǫ2 ∂r + Aψθ +ǫ2r2τψ α
(ǫrB)2 ∂θ.
The fact that the ﬁeld h is divergence-free implies that ψ solves the Neumann
boundary value problem
∆ ψ =ρ in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ νψ = 0 on S1
ℓ ×∂D2,
where
(5.5) ρ :=ǫB−3r(τκ sinθ −κ′ cosθ)
is minus the divergence of h0 (and, as such, satisﬁes
∫
ρdV = 0). We will also
assume that ∫ ψdαdy = 0 in order to determine ψ uniquely.
In the following two sections we will need some estimates for the harm onic ﬁeld h
(or, equivalently, for the function ψ) that depend on the particular form of the
source term ρ. These estimates are obtained in the following theorem, where we
calculate, up to some controllable error, some derivatives of the fu nctionψ that we
will use later on. To simplify the notation, we will write O(ǫn) for any function χ
satisfying the bound ‖χ‖C k ⩽ Ckǫn for all k (and also for numbers whose absolute
value is smaller than Cǫ n, but the meaning should be clear from the context).
Theorem 5.1. Consider the functions
ϕ0 := ǫ3(r3 − 3r)
8 (τκ sinθ −κ′ cosθ),(5.6)
ϕ1 := 13ǫ4(r4 − 2r2)
96 (τκ 2 sin 2θ −κκ′ cos 2θ),(5.7)
which are obviously of order O(ǫ3) and O(ǫ4), respectively. Then ψ is related to
these functions through the estimates
ψ = O(ǫ2),
Dyψ =Dyϕ0 + O(ǫ4),
∂θψ =∂θϕ0 +∂θϕ1 + O(ǫ5).
Proof. Let ρ0 :=ǫr(τκ sinθ −κ′ cosθ). It is easy to see that the function ϕ0(α,y )
is the only solution to the problem
∆ yϕ0 =ǫ2ρ0 in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ rϕ0|r=1 = 0,
∫
D2
ϕ0dy = 0
for any value of the angle α.
Consider now the function ψ1 := ψ −ϕ0, which obviously has zero normal de-
rivative on S1
ℓ ×∂D2 and has zero mean because so do ψ and ϕ0. The Laplacian
of ψ1 is given by
∆ ψ1 =ρ − ∆ ϕ0 = (ρ −ρ0) +
( ∆ yϕ0
ǫ2 − ∆ ϕ0
)
.
Using Eq. (5.5), the ﬁrst term in brackets can be easily shown to be
ρ −ρ0 = 3ǫ2κr2 cosθ
(
τκ sinθ −κ′ cosθ
)
+ O(ǫ3),22 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
while the second can be easily dealt with using the formula (4.2) for the Laplacian:
∆ yϕ0
ǫ2 − ∆ ϕ0 = κ
ǫ
(
cosθ∂ rϕ0 − sinθ∂ θϕ0
r
)
+ O(ǫ3).
Using the deﬁnition of ϕ0, this yields
∆ ψ1 =ρ1 +ρ2 + O(ǫ3),
with
ρ1 := 13ǫ2κr2
8
[
κτ sin 2θ −κ′ cos 2θ
]
,
ρ2 := ǫ2(3 − 14r2)κκ′
8
of order O(ǫ2), so the estimates we proved in Theorem 4.11 then ensure that
ψ1 = O(ǫ2) and Dyψ1 = O(ǫ4).
This shows that ψ = O(ǫ2) and Dyψ =Dyϕ0 + O(ǫ4).
To calculateDyψ up to O(ǫ5) we will consider two auxiliary functions ϕ1 andϕ2.
The function ϕ1(α,y ) is the solution to the problem
∆ yϕ1 =ǫ2ρ1 in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ rϕ1|r=1 = 0,
∫
D2
ϕ1dy = 0.
The existence and uniqueness of the solution are standard given th at the RHS
satisﬁes ∫
D2
ρ1dy = 0
for all α. In fact, the solution can be computed in closed form using separat ion of
variables, which readily yields the formula for ϕ1 given in the statement (Eq. (5.7)).
The function ϕ2 is the solution to the problem
∂2
αϕ2 + ∆ yϕ2
ǫ2 =ρ2 in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ rϕ2|r=1 = 0,
∫
ϕ2dαdy = 0.
Again, the existence and uniqueness of solutions is standard becau se the RHS sat-
isﬁes the zero-mean condition ∫
ρ2dαdy = 0.
(The reason why we are including derivatives with respect to α in the deﬁnition
ofϕ2 but not in that of ϕ1 is that the source term ρ2 has zero mean when averaged
with respect to α and y but not when averaged in y only.) Obviously ϕ2 does not
depend on θ.
We can now estimate ψ2 := ψ1 −ϕ1 −ϕ2 using the same argument we used
withψ1. We start by noticing that, by construction, ∂rψ2 = 0 when r = 1 and the
integral
∫
S1
ℓ ×D2ψ2dαdy is zero. The Laplacian of ψ2 is
∆ ψ2 =ρ1 +ρ2 − ∆ ϕ1 − ∆ ϕ2 + O(ǫ3)
=
( ∆ yϕ1
ǫ2 − ∆ ϕ1
)
+
(
∂2
αϕ2 + ∆ yϕ2
ǫ2 − ∆ ϕ2
)
+ O(ǫ3)
= O(ǫ3).EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 23
To pass to the third line we have used the expression of the Laplacian in polar
coordinates (Eq. (4.2)) and of ϕ1, as well as the estimates for ϕ2 that stem from
Theorem 4.11 and Remark 4.12. Another application of Theorem 4.11 s hows that
Dyψ2 = O(ǫ5). Since ∂θϕ2 = 0 and
ψ =ϕ0 +ϕ1 +ϕ2 +ψ2,
the theorem follows. □
6. Beltrami fields with prescribed harmonic part
Our goal in this section is to construct a Beltrami ﬁeld v in the thin tube Tǫ,
tangent to the boundary, whose harmonic part is a ﬁxed harmonic ﬁ eld h. We will
be particularly interested in the way the Beltrami ﬁeld v is related to the harmonic
ﬁeldh as the parameter λ tends to zero, since in the next section it will be crucial to
have good estimates for this relation in order to compute some dyna mical quantities
of the ﬁeld v.
This section is divided in three parts. In the ﬁrst subsection, we pro ve an exis-
tence result for a boundary value problem for the curl operator in tubes in which
we can prescribe the harmonic part of the solution (Corollary 6.3). I n the second
subsection we will provide estimates for an auxiliary vector equation with constant
coeﬃcients (Proposition 6.6), which are used in the third subsection to prove the
desired estimates, optimal in ǫ, for the boundary value problem under consideration
(Theorem 6.8).
6.1. An existence result for the curl operator. Let us begin by making precise
what we understand by the harmonic part of a vector ﬁeld w in the thin tube Tǫ
that is tangent to the boundary. We will deﬁne its harmonic part to be the vector
ﬁeld
Pw := h
‖h‖2
L2(Tǫ)
∫
Tǫ
h ·wdx,
that is, its projection to the space of harmonic vector ﬁelds H(Tǫ), as introduced
in Eq. (5.1). In this subsection, we will denote by
‖v‖2
Hk(Tǫ) :=
k∑
j=0
∫
Tǫ
|Djv|2dx
the usualH k norm of a vector ﬁeld in the tube Tǫ ⊂ R3 and writeL2(Tǫ) forH 0(Tǫ).
Throughout, we will use the notation Cǫ for positive constants, possibly not uni-
formly bounded in the small parameter ǫ, that may vary from line to line.
In the following proposition we present the basic existence result th at we will
use to show the existence of Beltrami ﬁelds with prescribed harmon ic part. The
result is probably known to some experts but we have not found it in t he literature.
The proof relies on a duality argument for a suitable energy function al and the
Fredholm alternative theorem.
Proposition 6.1. Letf be an L2 vector ﬁeld in Tǫ which is divergence-free. There
is a countable subset of the real line without accumulation p oints such that, if the
constantλ does not belong to it, then the equation
curlw −λw =f, divw = 0(6.1)24 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
has a unique H 1 solution w that is tangent to the boundary ∂Tǫ and has zero
harmonic part.
Proof. Let us consider the Hilbert spaces of vector ﬁelds
F :=
{
F ∈L2(Tǫ, R3) : div F = 0
}
,
W :=
{
w ∈H 1(Tǫ, R3) : w is tangent to ∂Tǫ
}
,
where the tangency condition is to be understood in terms of trace s. It is well
known [15] that, because of the tangency condition imposed on W, the H 1 norm is
equivalent to the norm
‖w‖2
W := ‖ curlw‖2
L2(Tǫ) + ‖ divw‖2
L2(Tǫ) + ‖Pw‖2
L2(Tǫ)
in the sense that, for all w ∈ W ,
‖w‖W
Cǫ
⩽ ‖w‖H1(Tǫ) ⩽ Cǫ‖w‖W.
Consider the scalar product E : W × W → R associated to the norm ‖ · ‖ W,
given by
E[w,u ] :=
∫
Tǫ
(
curlw · curlu + divw divu + Pw · Pu
)
dx.
By the Riesz representation theorem, for any L2 vector ﬁeld F there is a unique
wF ∈ W such that
(6.2) E[wF,u ] =
∫
Tǫ
F · curludx
for all u ∈ W .
We claim that, for any F ∈ F , the condition (6.2) is equivalent to demanding
thatwF be an H 1 solution to the equation
curlwF =F, divwF = 0(6.3)
in the tube Tǫ that is tangent to the boundary and has zero harmonic part. One
side of the implication is obvious, so we only need to prove that if wF satisﬁes the
condition (6.2) with F ∈ F , then it solves Eq. (6.3).
For this, let us take suitable choices of the ﬁeld u in Eq. (6.2). Letting u = PwF
be the harmonic part of wF , we obtain that PwF is zero. To see that div wF is zero
too, it suﬃces to take u = ∇ψ, with ψ being the solution to the boundary value
problem
∆ ψ = divwF in Tǫ, ∂ νψ|∂Tǫ = 0,
∫
Tǫ
ψdx = 0.
Notice that, in order to show that the solution exists and ∇ψ belongs to the
space W, we need to use that wF is in H 1 and tangent to the boundary.
Since PwF and divwF are zero, the condition (6.2) can then be written as
(6.4)
∫
Tǫ
curlG ·udx +
∫
∂Tǫ
(G ×ν) ·udσ = 0
for all u ∈ W , where
G := curlwF −FEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 25
anddσ denotes the induced surface measure on the boundary. Letting u vary over
the space of smooth vector ﬁelds of compact support in Tǫ, we immediately infer
thatG must be irrotational. Now that we know the ﬁrst term in (6.4) is always zero,
we can take an arbitrary ﬁeld u tangent to the boundary to derive that G ×ν must
be zero, so that G is divergence-free, irrotational and orthogonal to the boundar y.
By the Hodge decomposition theorem, this ensures the ﬁeld G is identically zero.
Hence we have proved that wF is the only solution to the problem (6.3). Notice
that, as an immediate consequence of the equivalence of the H 1 norm to ‖ · ‖W on
W,
(6.5) ‖wF ‖H1(Tǫ) ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖L2(Tǫ)
for some constant that depends on ǫ but not on F .
Let us consider the operator K mapping a ﬁeld F ∈ F to its solution wF , which
we regard as a linear map K : F → F whose image lies in W. It is standard in
view of the estimate (6.5) that the operator K is compact, so by the Fredholm
alternative the equation
(6.6) Kw − 1
λw = ˜f
has a unique solution for each ˜f ∈ F and any constant 1/λ that does not belong to
the spectrum of the adjoint operator K ∗. This spectrum is a bounded countable
set that only accumulates at zero.
Letw be the only solution to Eq. (6.6) with ˜f = −Kf/λ , for an arbitrary ﬁeld f
in F . Since w =K(λw +f ) belongs to the image of K, from the above discussion
it stems that the ﬁeld w is tangent to the boundary, divergence-free and has zero
harmonic part, and by the deﬁnition of K satisﬁes curlw =λw+f . The proposition
then follows. □
Remark 6.2. The proof of the proposition shows that the values of λ for which
there is not a unique solution to the Eq. (6.1) are given by the recipro cal of the
eigenvalues of the compact operator K ∗ that we deﬁned in the proof.
As a direct application of the previous proposition, we derive the follo wing corol-
lary, which gives the existence result for Beltrami ﬁelds with prescr ibed harmonic
part that we will use later on. Of course, it is apparent that this cor ollary is totally
diﬀerent from the results that one has on compact manifolds withou t boundary,
where the Beltrami equation has no solutions but for λ belonging to a countable
set and these solutions (i.e., the eigenfunctions of curl) are necess arily orthogonal
to harmonic ﬁelds.
Corollary 6.3. For any constant λ not belonging to certain ǫ-dependent countable
set without accumulation points, there is a unique solution to the equation
curlv =λv, divv = 0
in the tube Tǫ that is tangent to the boundary and whose harmonic part is Pv =h.
Proof. It follows immediately from Proposition 6.1 by taking v = h +w, with w
being the only solution to Eq. (6.1) with f =λh. □26 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
6.2. Estimates for an equation with constant coeﬃcients. In this section
we will prove estimates for a curl-type equation with constant coeﬃ cients on the
domain S1
ℓ × D2. This equation with constant coeﬃcients is closely related to the
Beltrami equation on the thin tube Tǫ and will be used subsequently to estimate
the diﬀerence between the Beltrami ﬁeld v and its harmonic part h. As before, the
natural coordinates on the domain S1
ℓ × D2 will be denoted by ( α,y ), and we will
consider polar coordinates ( α,r,θ ) where convenient.
Vector ﬁelds on S1
ℓ × D2 are regarded as functions W : S1
ℓ × D2 → R3, whose
components are denoted by
W = (Wα,W 1,W 2).
We will sometimes write Wy := (W1,W 2). On these vector ﬁelds we will consider
the action of the diﬀerential operators
DivW :=∂αWα +∂1W1 +∂2W2,
CurlǫW :=
(
∂1W2 −∂2W1,∂2Wα
ǫ2 −∂αW2,∂ αW1 − ∂1Wα
ǫ2
)
,
and we will say that a vector ﬁeld W is tangent to the boundary if y ·Wy = 0 (in the
sense of traces) on the torus |y| = 1. Obviously, Div and Curl ǫ are related to the
standard divergence and curl operators through a rescaling, bu t for our purposes
this form of the operators is more convenient.
We will also consider the functional Q that maps each ﬁeld W to the real number
Q[W ] :=
∫
Wαdαdy.
This is obviously related with the projection onto the space of “harm onic ﬁelds”
associated to the operators Div and Curl ǫ, which is spanned by the constant ﬁeld
(1, 0, 0), so when Q[W ] = 0 we will simply say that the harmonic part of Q[v] is
zero. All integrals are taken over S1
ℓ × D2 unless otherwise stated. To control the
behavior of the vector ﬁelds, in addition to the usual H k norms we will consider
the norms
(6.7) ‖W ‖2
Hkǫ
:= ‖Wα‖2
Hk +ǫ2‖Wy‖2
Hk.
These norms should not be confused with the norm ‖ · ‖ ˙H1ǫ
that we considered for
scalar functions in Section 4. We will simply write ‖ · ‖ ǫ for the corresponding
L2
ǫ norm (k = 0), and reserve the notation ‖ · ‖ for the usual L2 norm, where factors
of ǫ do not appear.
In the following proposition we compute the lowest eigenvalue of a self -adjoint
operator associated with Curl ǫ to show how the L2
ǫ norm of a vector ﬁeld W can
be controlled using that of Curl ǫW :
Proposition 6.4. LetW be an H 1 vector ﬁeld on S1
ℓ × D2 with DivW = 0 that is
tangent to the boundary and has zero harmonic part. Then
‖ CurlǫW ‖ǫ /greaterorequalslantC ‖W ‖ǫ
ǫ .
Proof. It is an easy consequence of [31] that Curl ǫ deﬁnes an unbounded self-adjoint
operator on the Hilbert space
H :=
{
W ∈L2(S1
ℓ ×D2, R3) : Div W = 0, Q[W ] = 0, W tangent to the boundary
}
,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 27
endowed with the scalar product associated with the norm ‖ · ‖ ǫ. The domain of
this operator consists of the H 1 vector ﬁelds in H such that Curl ǫW is also in
H. Hence, to prove the proposition it is enough to see that the eigenv alues of this
operator, in absolute value, satisfy |µ|>C/ǫ .
Exploiting the symmetry of the equations (that is, rotation of the a nglesα andθ),
it is not hard to see that the eigenvalue equation
CurlǫW =µW,
withW divergence-free, tangent to the boundary and with zero harmon ic part, can
be solved in closed form. Indeed, the symmetry ensures that the e igenfunctions can
be chosen of the form
W = e inα+imθ(
v1(r)eα +v2(r)er +v3(r)eθ
)
,
where n,m are integers, vj(r) are functions of the radial variable and the unit
vectorseα,e r,e θ are deﬁned in the obvious way:
eα := (1, 0, 0), e r := (0, cosθ, sinθ), e θ := (0, − sinθ, cosθ).
Using this expression, a tedious but straightforward computation shows that the
eigenvalues with the smallest absolute value are ±j(1)
1 /ǫ, where j(1)
1 denotes the
ﬁrst positive zero of the Bessel function J1. □
In the proof of the main result of this subsection we will need the follo wing
identity:
Lemma 6.5. LetW be a vector ﬁeld tangent to the boundary of S1
ℓ × D2. Then
ǫ2‖∂αWy‖2 + ‖DyWy‖2 + ‖∂αWα‖2 +ǫ−2‖DyWα‖2 = ‖ DivW ‖2
+ ‖ CurlǫW ‖2
ǫ −
∫
S1
ℓ ×∂D2
|Wy|2dαdθ,
where we are writing dαdθ for the induced surface measure on S1
ℓ ×∂D2.
Proof. One can easily check that
‖ DivW ‖2 + ‖ CurlǫW ‖2
ǫ = ‖∂αWα‖2
+
2∑
i=1
(
ǫ2‖∂αWi‖2 + ‖∂iWα‖2
ǫ2
)
+
2∑
i,j=1
‖∂iWj ‖2 +S,
where
S :=
∑
i,j∈{α,1,2}
∫ (
∂iWi∂jWj −∂jWi∂iWj
)
dαdy.28 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
We can now integrate by parts to write
S = −
2∑
i,j=1
∫
S1
ℓ ×∂D2
(yjWi∂iWj +yjWα∂αWj)dαdθ
=
2∑
i,j=1
∫
S1
ℓ ×∂D2
Wj∂i(yjWi)dαdθ
=
2∑
i=1
∫
S1
ℓ ×∂D2
W 2
i dαdθ.
To pass to the second identity we have used that y ·Wy is zero on the boundary,
so the second summand in the ﬁrst integrand vanishes, and taken a dvantage of the
fact that W is tangent to the boundary to integrate by parts a second time. □
In the following proposition, which is the main result in this subsection, we prove
an estimate for the operators Div and Curl ǫ that is “optimal” with respect to the
small parameter ǫ. In the proof of this version of the inequalities we will also derive
another in which the RHS has one derivative less than the LHS, as is cu stomary.
However, the estimate we will need later on is the former, which is why it is the one
that appears in the statement. It is not hard to check that the de pendence on ǫ of
both estimates is sharp.
Proposition 6.6. Let W be any vector ﬁeld in S1
ℓ × D2 that is tangent to the
boundary and satisﬁes the equation
CurlǫW =F, DivW =ρ
for a scalar function ρ and a vector ﬁeld F . Then
‖Wα‖Hk + ‖DyWα‖Hk ⩽ Ck
(
ǫ‖F ‖Hkǫ + ‖ρ‖Hk +
⏐
⏐Q[W ]
⏐
⏐)
,
‖∂αWα‖Hk ⩽ Ck
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ + ‖ρ‖Hk
)
,
‖Wy‖Hk +ǫ‖∂αWy‖Hk + ‖DyWy‖Hk ⩽ Ck
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ
+ ‖ρ‖Hk +
⏐
⏐Q[W ]
⏐
⏐)
for constants that depend on k but not on ǫ.
Proof. We can write the ﬁeld W as the sum of three ﬁelds:
(6.8) W =V +
(
∂αψ,∂1ψ
ǫ2 ,∂2ψ
ǫ2
)
+
( Q[W ]
|S1
ℓ × D2|, 0, 0
)
.
The scalar function ψ that appears in the second vector ﬁeld is deﬁned as the only
solution to the Neumann boundary value problem
(6.9) ∂2
αψ + ∆ yψ
ǫ2 =ρ in S1
ℓ × D2, ∂ νψ|S1
ℓ ×∂D2 = 0,
∫
S1
ℓ ×D2
ψdαdy = 0,
and it should be noticed that the third vector ﬁeld (which correspon ds to the
harmonic part of W ) is constant. As a consequence of these deﬁnitions and the
properties of W , the ﬁeld V is tangent to the boundary, has zero harmonic part
(Q[V ] = 0) and satisﬁes the equation
(6.10) Curl ǫV =F, DivV = 0.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 29
The H k estimates stated in Remark 4.12 (Eq. (4.17)), applied to the bounda ry
problem (6.9), provide suitable control of the second ﬁeld that app ears in Eq. (6.8)
(that is, the “gradient” part) and its derivatives, as they show th at
‖∂αψ‖Hk + ‖∂2
αψ‖Hk + ‖Dy∂αψ‖Hk
ǫ ⩽ C‖ρ‖Hk,
‖Dyψ‖Hk
ǫ2 + ‖Dy∂αψ‖Hk
ǫ + ‖D2
yψ‖Hk
ǫ2 ⩽ C‖ρ‖Hk.
The third ﬁeld in Eq. (6.8) is trivial to control as it is constant. There fore, to prove
the proposition it is enough to derive suitable estimates for the ﬁeld V .
Hence, our goal is to show that the vector ﬁeld V satisﬁes
‖Vα‖Hk + ‖DyVα‖Hk ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖Hk
ǫ
,(6.11a)
‖∂αVα‖Hk ⩽ C‖F ‖Hkǫ ,(6.11b)
‖Vy‖Hk +ǫ‖∂αVy‖Hk + ‖DyVy‖Hk ⩽ C‖F ‖Hk
ǫ
.(6.11c)
For this we start by noticing that, when applied to Eq. (6.10), the L2 estimate
proved in Proposition 6.4 yields ‖V ‖ǫ ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖ǫ, or equivalently
(6.12) ‖Vα‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖ǫ, ‖Vy‖ ⩽ C‖F ‖ǫ.
To prove the inequalities (6.11), we start by using estimates for bou ndary traces
and interpolation to control the term
S :=
∫
S1
ℓ ×∂D2
|Vy|2 = ‖Vy‖2
L2(S1
ℓ ×∂D2)
⩽ C‖Vy‖2
L2(S1
ℓ )×H1/2(D2) ⩽ C‖Vy‖
(
‖Vy‖ + ‖DyVy‖
)
that appears in Lemma 6.5. Together with the L2 estimate (6.12), we can then
apply Lemma 6.5 to the ﬁeld V to infer that
‖∂αVα‖ ⩽ C‖F ‖ǫ, ‖DyVα‖ ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖ǫ,
‖∂αVy‖ ⩽ C
ǫ ‖F ‖ǫ, ‖DyVy‖ ⩽ C‖F ‖ǫ.
This proves the estimate (6.11) for k = 0.
The derivation of higher-order estimates from these inequalities is s tandard. To
show the basic ideas, let us sketch the proof of the k = 1 estimates. Interior
estimates are obtained by considering the identity shown in Lemma 6.5 for the
vector ﬁeld ∂i(χV ), where i = 1, 2 andχ is a smooth function, compactly supported
in S1
ℓ × D2 and equal to one in the region |y|< 1/2. Besides, it is easy to estimate
derivatives of V with respect to α because the ﬁeld ∂j
αV is still tangent to the
boundary, divergence-free, has zero harmonic part and satisﬁe s the equation
Curlǫ(∂j
αV ) = ∂j
αF.
Analogous properties can be shown too for the globally deﬁned ﬁeld
∂θV + (0,V 2, −V1),
with∂θ :=y1∂2 −y2∂1 the angular derivative, so the same argument can be applied
for this ﬁeld. Since the second summand is obviously controlled by the previous
estimates, this yields good H 1 estimates for∂θV . To get estimates for the ﬁeld V up
to the boundary, it now suﬃces to control the radial derivative ∂rV in the region
|y| > 1/2, and this can be readily done by writing the equation (6.10) in polar30 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
coordinates, taking its derivative with respect to r and isolating the terms having
two radial derivatives. This process can be readily iterated to get t he desired
H k estimates. The details, which can be easily ﬁlled using these comments , are
omitted. □
6.3. Estimates for Beltrami ﬁelds in thin tubes. In this subsection we es-
tablish some estimates for Beltrami ﬁelds deﬁned on the tube Tǫ. The point of
these estimates will be to control the diﬀerence between a Beltram i ﬁeld v and its
harmonic part h in terms of the Beltrami parameter λ, while ensuring that the
dependence on ǫ of these estimates is optimal. As we did in Section 4 (but not in
Subsection 6.1), we will identify Tǫ with S1
ℓ × D2 through the coordinates ( α,y ).
Given a vector ﬁeld v in the tube, we will consider its components ( vα,v 1,v 2),
deﬁned through the relation
v =vα∂α +v1∂1 +v2∂2.
We will use these coordinates to deﬁne the norms H k
ǫ , just as in Eq. (6.7), of vector
ﬁelds in Tǫ, using the obvious formula:
‖v‖2
Hkǫ
:= ‖vα‖2
Hk +ǫ2‖vy‖2
Hk.
Here the Sobolev norms in the RHS denote the usual scalar norms an d we are using
the notation vy := (v1,v 2). It should be noticed that these norms reﬂect to some
extent the eﬀect of the metric on the way vectors are measured; in particular, the
L2 norm deﬁned by the above formula is obviously equivalent through co nstants
that do not depend on ǫ to the perhaps more appealing expression
∫
g(v,v )dV ,
where g denotes the expression of the Euclidean metric in these coordinate s and
dV is the normalized volume (cf. Eq. (3.1) and Eq. (3.5)).
We will begin with the following result, whose proof hinges on the analog ous
estimates proved for an equation with constant coeﬃcients that w e established in
Proposition 6.6:
Proposition 6.7. Suppose that the vector ﬁeld w is tangent to the boundary, has
zero harmonic part ( Pw = 0) and satisﬁes the equation
(6.13) curl w =f, divw = 0
in Tǫ. Then
‖w‖Hkǫ
⩽ Ckǫ‖f ‖Hkǫ
.
Proof. In the notation of Subsection 6.2, let us consider the vector ﬁeld W : S1
ℓ ×
D2 → R3 given by
W :=
(
Awα +ǫ2τ (y2w1 −y1w2),w 1 +τy 2wα,w 2 −τy 1wα
)
,
where we recall that A is the function deﬁned in Eq. (3.2). It can be checked that W
is given by the components (in the coordinates ( α,y )) of the 1-form dual to w up
to a rescaling of the y components by a factor of ǫ−2. It is worth noticing that, as
the ﬁeld w is tangent to the boundary of the tube Tǫ, a simple computation using
the deﬁnition of W shows that the ﬁeld W is tangent to the boundary S1
ℓ ×∂D2,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 31
that is, y ·Wy = 0 on |y| = 1. Moreover, the components of the ﬁeld w on the tube
can be recovered from those of W through the relations
wα = Wα +ǫ2τ (y1W2 −y2W1)
B2 ,(6.14a)
w1 =W1 − τy 2[Wα +ǫ2τ (y1W2 −y2W1)]
B2 ,(6.14b)
w2 =W2 + τy 1[Wα +ǫ2τ (y1W2 −y2W1)]
B2 ,(6.14c)
where the function B was deﬁned in Eq. (3.6).
Using the notation
B1 := B
B2 +ǫ2τ 2y2
2
, B 2 := B
B2 +ǫ2τ 2y2
1
,
we will also consider the ﬁeld F : S1
ℓ × D2 → R3 and the function ρW : S1
ℓ × D2 → R
deﬁned by
F :=
( Afα +ǫ2τ (y2f1 −y1f2)
B ,f1 +τy 2fα
B1
,f2 −τy 1fα
B2
)
,
ρW :=∂α
[
Wα
(
1 − 1
B
)]
+∂1
[
W1
(
1 − 1
B1
)]
+∂2
[
W2
(
1 − 1
B2
)]
.
Notice that, by the deﬁnition of the functions A and B, we trivially have
‖F ‖Hk
ǫ
⩽ C‖f ‖Hk
ǫ
,(6.15)
‖ρW ‖Hk ⩽ Cǫ
(
‖W ‖Hk + ‖∂αWα‖Hk + ‖DyWy‖Hk
)
.(6.16)
A straightforward computation shows that Eq. (6.13) can be writt en in terms of
the ﬁeld W as
(6.17) Curl ǫW =F, DivW =ρW.
To derive estimates for W , we start by analyzing Q[W ]. To this end, we recall
(cf. e.g. [31]) that if dσ denotes the induced surface measure on the disk
{α =α0} ⊂ T ǫ,
the fact that the ﬁeld w has zero harmonic part ( Pw = 0) is equivalent to the
assertion that
0 =
∫
{α=α0}
g(w,ν )dσ =
∫
D2
Bwα
⏐
⏐
α=α0
dy
for each angle α0. Since A −B is of order ǫ, using the above equality one can
estimate
|Q[W ]| =
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫
Wαdαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ =
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫ (
Awα +ǫ2τ (y2w1 −y1w2)
)
dαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
=
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
∫ (
(A −B)wα +ǫ2τ (y2w1 −y1w2)
)
dαdy
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⩽ Cǫ‖wα‖ +Cǫ 2‖wy‖
⩽ Cǫ‖Wα‖ +Cǫ 2‖Wy‖,(6.18)
where to derive the last inequality we have used the expression of th e components
of w in terms of those of W given in Eq. (6.14).32 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
We are now ready to derive some estimates for the vector ﬁeld W . Since W is
tangent to S1
ℓ ×∂D2, we can apply Proposition 6.6 to Eq. (6.17) to obtain
‖Wα‖Hk ⩽ C
(
ǫ‖F ‖Hkǫ + ‖ρW ‖Hk +
⏐
⏐Q[W ]
⏐
⏐)
,(6.19a)
‖∂αWα‖Hk ⩽ C
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ + ‖ρW ‖Hk
)
,(6.19b)
‖Wy‖Hk + ‖DyWy‖Hk ⩽ C
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ
+ ‖ρW ‖Hk +
⏐
⏐Q[W ]
⏐
⏐)
.(6.19c)
Going back to Eq. (6.16), this yields
‖ρW ‖Hk ⩽ Cǫ
(
‖F ‖Hk
ǫ
+ ‖Wα‖Hk + ‖Wy‖Hk
)
.
Plugging this inequality and the bound (6.18) for Q[W ] in Eq. (6.19), we immedi-
ately get
‖Wα‖Hk ⩽ Cǫ
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ + ‖Wα‖Hk + ‖Wy‖Hk
)
,
‖Wy‖Hk ⩽ C
(
‖F ‖Hkǫ +ǫ‖Wα‖Hk +ǫ‖Wy‖Hk
)
.
From these estimates one readily infers that, for small ǫ,
‖Wα‖Hk +ǫ‖Wy‖Hk ⩽ Cǫ‖F ‖Hkǫ .
In view of the formulas (6.14), ‖w‖Hkǫ
⩽ C‖W ‖Hkǫ
, so the proposition follows from
the bound (6.15) for the H k
ǫ norm of F . □
We are now ready to prove the main result in this section, which estima tes the
diﬀerence between a Beltrami ﬁeld in the tube and its harmonic part in terms of
the Beltrami parameter λ:
Theorem 6.8. Letλ be any nonzero real constant that is smaller in absolute valu e
than some ﬁxed positive constant Λ . For small enough ǫ, the problem
curlv =λv
has a unique solution in the tube Tǫ that is tangent to the boundary and whose
harmonic part Pv is the harmonic ﬁeld h. Moreover, the diﬀerence between the
ﬁeld v and the harmonic ﬁeld is bounded pointwise by
‖vα −hα‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) +ǫ‖vy −hy‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) ⩽ Ck,Λǫ |λ|,
where the constant only depends on k and Λ .
Proof. Let us write w :=v −h, so that the ﬁeld w is tangent to the boundary, has
zero harmonic part and satisﬁes the equation
(6.20) curl w =λw +λh, divw = 0.
We proved in Proposition 6.1 and Remark 6.2 that this equation has a un ique
solution if and only if 1 /λ is not an eigenvalue of the operator K ∗ introduced in
the proof of the aforementioned proposition. As λ is real, this is equivalent to 1 /λ
being eigenvalue of the operator K, which means that there is a divergence-free
L2 ﬁeld u such that
Ku = u
λ.
Suppose that 1 /λ is an eigenvalue of K. By the properties of K proved in
Proposition 6.1, this means that the nonzero vector ﬁeld Ku is tangent to the
boundary, has zero harmonic part and satisﬁes
curl(Ku) = λKu, div(Ku) = 0.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 33
Applying the estimate proved in Proposition 6.7 to this equation, we ge t
‖Ku‖L2
ǫ ⩽ Cǫ|λ|‖Ku‖L2
ǫ,
which means that
|λ|>C/ǫ
for some positive constant that does not depend on ǫ.
Therefore the problem (6.20) has a unique solution for all |λ| ⩽ Λ, provided ǫ is
small enough. Moreover, when applied to Eq. (6.20), Proposition 6.7 ensures that
‖w‖Hk
ǫ
⩽ Ckǫ|λ|
(
‖w‖Hk
ǫ
+ ‖h‖Hk
ǫ
)
,
which yields
‖w‖Hkǫ ⩽ Ckǫ|λ|‖h‖Hkǫ
provided that ǫ is smaller than some constant of the form C/Λ. Since the H k
ǫ norm
of the harmonic ﬁeld is bounded uniformly in ǫ as
‖h‖Hkǫ ⩽ Ck
due to Eq. (5.3) and the estimates in Theorem 5.1, we obtain
‖w‖Hkǫ
⩽ Ckǫ|λ|.
Cs pointwise estimates for w are immediately obtained from this bound by taking
k =s + 2 and using Sobolev embeddings. □
7. A KAM theorem for Beltrami fields with small λ
Let us consider the harmonic ﬁeld h in the tube Tǫ, as introduced in Eq. (5.3).
As before, we will assume that the thickness ǫ is small. By Theorem 6.8, for any λ
smaller in absolute value than some ﬁxed, ǫ-independent constant, there is a unique
solution v to the Beltrami equation
curlv =λv
in Tǫ that is tangent to the boundary and whose harmonic part is h. We are
interested in the case where the Beltrami constant λ is suitably small. For simplicity
of notation, throughout this section we will take λ := ǫ3 (although we could have
taken any nonzero constant λ = O(ǫ3)) and refer to the vector ﬁeld v corresponding
to this choice of λ as the local Beltrami ﬁeld .
Our objective in this section is to study some ﬁne dynamical propert ies of the
local Beltrami ﬁeld v. More precisely, we will show that for small values of ǫ
and “most” core curves γ, the boundary of the tube Tǫ is an invariant torus of
the ﬁeld v that is preserved (i.e., there is a small perturbation of ∂Tǫ that is still
invariant) under suitably small perturbations of v. For this, we will see that the
key point is the analysis of the harmonic ﬁeld h, which is close to the local Beltrami
ﬁeld v as a consequence of the estimates proved in Theorem 6.8 and the fa ct that
the Beltrami parameter λ = ǫ3 is small. At this point, it is worth emphasizing
that, to some extent, the proofs of the dynamical properties th at we study in this
section ultimately depend on the estimates derived in Section 4. In pa rticular, if
the dependence on ǫ of these estimates were worse, we would not be able to check
the nondegeneracy conditions of the KAM theorem we prove in this s ection.
This section is divided into four parts. In Subsection 7.1 we consider t he tra-
jectories of the local Beltrami ﬁeld, after a rescaling of the ﬁeld (w hich does not34 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
alter their geometric structure), and calculate these trajector ies perturbatively in
a suitable range of time (Proposition 7.1). In Subsections 7.2 and 7.3 w e use these
perturbative expressions to compute the rotation number and no rmal torsion of
the Poincar´ e map of the local Beltrami ﬁeld (Theorems 7.4 and 7.8), which are
the quantities that control the stability of the torus in the KAM the orem that we
establish in Subsection 7.4 (Theorem 7.10).
7.1. T rajectories of the local Beltrami ﬁeld. In this subsection we aim to
compute the trajectories of the local Beltrami ﬁeld v perturbatively in the small
parameterǫ. From Theorem 6.8 and the fact that the Beltrami parameter is λ =ǫ3,
it follows that the local Beltrami ﬁeld v is close to the harmonic ﬁeld in the sense
that
(7.1) ‖vα −hα‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <C kǫ4, ‖vy −hy‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <C kǫ3.
Since the harmonic ﬁeld can be written as h =h0+∇ψ (withh0 and ∇ψ respectively
given by (5.2) and (5.4)), from the estimates for ψ proved in Theorem 5.1 we infer
that
vα =B−2(1 +ψα +τψ θ) + O(ǫ4)
= 1 + O(ǫ).
In particular, as vα does not vanish for small ǫ, we can consider the analytic vector
ﬁeld
(7.2) X := v
vα
.
We will use this vector ﬁeld to study the geometric structure of the trajectories of
the local Beltrami ﬁeld, since both ﬁelds have the same unparametr ized trajectories
and the vector ﬁeld X presents certain computational advantages, as we shall see
in the next subsection. Before we go on, and identifying the tube Tǫ with S1
ℓ × D2
through the coordinates (α,y ), let us note that the ﬁeld X is well deﬁned in a small
neighborhood of S1
ℓ ×
D2 because so is the local Beltrami ﬁeld v.
The trajectories of X are given by the parametrization ( α(s),r (s),θ (s)), where
these functions satisfy the system of ODEs
˙α = 1,(7.3a)
˙r = B2ψr
ǫ2(1 +ψα +τψ θ) + O(ǫ3),(7.3b)
˙θ = τ + (ǫr)−2Aψθ +τψ α
1 +ψα +τψ θ
+ O(ǫ3).(7.3c)
These equations can be read oﬀ from the deﬁnition of the ﬁeld X and its connection
with the harmonic ﬁeld (Eq. (7.1)) and the formulas (5.3) and (5.4) fo r the harmonic
ﬁeld and the gradient of ψ. The point of the trajectory not only depends on the “ﬂow
parameter” s, but also on the initial conditions ( α0,r 0,θ 0) at s = 0. Without loss
of generality, in this section we will always take α0 = 0, and make the dependence
of the trajectory on ( r0,θ 0) explicit by writing
(
α(s;r0,θ 0),r (s;r0,θ 0),θ (s;r0,θ 0)
)
when appropriate.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 35
Throughout, it will be convenient to denote by θ not only the angular coordinate
in S1, but also its lift to the real line. It should be noticed that the formula s we
will give below are actually valid for the lifted coordinate too, which will b e of use
in the following subsection.
In the following lemma we will compute the trajectory of the ﬁeld X at time
s ∈ [0,ℓ ] up to a controllable error. We will assume that r0 is bounded away from 0
so that the trajectory cannot reach the coordinate singularity {r = 0} at any time
s ∈ [0,ℓ ]. This is convenient in view of the terms 1 /r2 that appear in the equations
and is not a restriction for the applications that we have in mind, as we will be only
concerned with initial conditions near the invariant torus {r = 1}. For simplicity, in
this lemma we will abuse the notation and denote by O(ǫj) a quantity Q(r0,θ 0,s )
that is uniformly bounded as
⏐
⏐∂k
r0∂l
θ0Q(r0,θ 0,s )
⏐
⏐<C klǫj
for r0 in any ﬁxed compact set of the interval (0 , 1] (which is the domain where
polar coordinates deﬁne a diﬀeomorphism), θ0 ∈ S1 and s ∈ [0,ℓ ], provided ǫ is
small enough.
Proposition 7.1. Consider the solution to the system (7.3) with initial condition
(0,r 0,θ 0) and r0 > 0. At time s ∈ [0,ℓ ], this solution is given by
α(s;r0,θ 0) = s,
r(s;r0,θ 0) = r0 + O(ǫ),
θ(s;r0,θ 0) = θ(0)(s) +ǫθ (1)(s) +ǫ2θ(2)(s) + O(ǫ3),
where each quantity θ(j)(s) ≡θ(j)(s;r0,θ 0) is of order O(1) and given by
θ(0)(s) := θ0 +
∫ s
0
τ (¯s)d¯s,
θ(1)(s) := r2
0 − 3
8r0
[
κ(s) sinθ(0)(s) −κ(0) sinθ0
]
,
θ(2)(s) := 12 − 5r2
0
32
∫ s
0
κ(¯s)2τ (¯s)d¯s + 3(r4
0 + 2r2
0 − 3)κ(s)κ(0)
64r2
0
cosθ0 sinθ(0)(s)
− (3 −r2
0)2κ(s)κ(0)
64r2
0
sinθ0 cosθ(0)(s) + (27 − 50r2
0 + 25r4
0)κ(s)2
384r2
0
sin 2θ(0)(s)
+ (27 + 14r2
0 − 31r4
0)κ(0)2
384r2
0
sin 2θ0.
Proof. Converting the ODEs (7.3) into integral equations, it is clear that, f or s ∈
[0,ℓ ],
α(s;r0,θ 0) = s,(7.4a)
r(s;r0,θ 0) = r0 +
∫ s
0
B2ψr
ǫ2(1 +ψα +τψ θ)d¯s + O(ǫ3),(7.4b)
θ(s;r0,θ 0) = θ0 +
∫ s
0
τ + (ǫr)−2Aψθ +τψ α
1 +ψα +τψ θ
d¯s + O(ǫ3).(7.4c)36 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
In these equations all the functions under the integral signs are e valuated along the
trajectories, i.e., at the point
(7.5) α = ¯s, r =r(¯s;r0,θ 0), θ =θ(¯s;r0,θ 0).
Let us solve the equations perturbatively. We start by noticing tha t, as a con-
sequence of the bounds for ψ derived in Theorem 5.1 (and its connection with the
functions ϕ0,ϕ 1 introduced in this theorem), the integrands can be expanded in ǫ
as
τ + (ǫr)−2Aψθ +τψ α
1 +ψα +τψ θ
=
(
τ + Aψθ
ǫ2r2 +τψ α
) (
1 −ψα + O(ǫ3)
)
=τ + Aψθ
ǫ2r2 + O(ǫ3).(7.6)
B2ψr
ǫ2(1 +ψα +τψ θ) = ∂rϕ0
ǫ2 + O(ǫ2),(7.7)
Sincer0 > 0 and s ∈ [0,ℓ ] (which allows us to control the eﬀect of the denominator
1/r2 for small enough ǫ), we immediately infer from Eqs. (7.4b) and (7.4c) that
(7.8) r(s;r0,θ 0) = r0 + O(ǫ), θ (s;r0,θ 0) = θ(0)(s) + O(ǫ).
Of course, we deﬁne each function θ(j)(s) as in the statement of the proposition.
Now that we have the zeroth-order expression of the trajector ies, we will next
compute them up to second-order corrections. For convenience we will use the
notation
R0(r) := r3 − 3r
8 , R1(r) := 13(r4 − 2r2)
96
for the dependence of ϕ0 and ϕ1 on r, respectively. We start with the analysis of
the radial coordinate of the trajectories. Using again Eq. (7.7) an d the zeroth-order
estimates for the trajectories (7.8), we derive that
r(s;r0,θ 0) = r0 +
∫ s
0
[∂rϕ0(¯s,r 0 + O(ǫ),θ (0)(¯s) + O(ǫ))
ǫ2 + O(ǫ2)
]
d¯s + O(ǫ3)
=r0 +
∫ s
0
∂rϕ0(¯s,r 0,θ (0)(¯s))
ǫ2 d¯s + O(ǫ2)
=r0 +ǫR′
0(r0)
∫ s
0
[
τ (¯s)κ(¯s) sinθ(0)(¯s) −κ′(¯s) cosθ(0)(¯s)
]
d¯s + O(ǫ2)
=r0 −ǫR′
0(r0)
∫ s
0
d
d¯s
(
κ(¯s) cosθ(0)(¯s)
)
d¯s + O(ǫ2)
=r0 +ǫr (1)(s) + O(ǫ2),(7.9)
where
r(1)(s) := 3(1 −r2
0)
8
[
κ(s) cosθ(0)(s) −κ(0) cosθ0
]
.
To pass to the second line we have used the mean value theorem and t he obvious
Ck bound ϕ0 = O(ǫ3), and to complete the calculation we have just plugged in
the formulas for ϕ0 (Eq. (5.6)) and the deﬁnition of θ(0)(s). In a totally analogousEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 37
manner we can compute θ(s;r0,θ 0) up to O(ǫ2):
θ(s;r0,θ 0) = θ(0)(s) +
∫ s
0
[Aψθ
(ǫr)2 + O(ǫ3)
] ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(s,r0+O(ǫ),θ(0)(s)+O(ǫ))
d¯s + O(ǫ3)
=θ(0)(s) +
∫ s
0
∂θϕ0(¯s,r 0,θ (0)(s))
(ǫr0)2 d¯s + O(ǫ2)
=θ(0)(s) + ǫR0(r0)
r2
0
∫ s
0
[
τ (¯s)κ(¯s) cosθ(0)(¯s) +κ′(¯s) sinθ(0)(¯s)
]
d¯s
=θ(0)(s) +ǫθ (1)(s) + O(ǫ2).(7.10)
To complete the proof we need to calculate θ(s;r0,θ 0) up to O(ǫ3). The proce-
dure is as above but the computations are more tedious. We start b y noticing that
the term Aψθ that appears in the integrand (7.6) can be written as
Aψθ =∂θϕ0 +
(
∂θϕ1 − 2ǫκr cosθ∂ θϕ0
)
+ O(ǫ5)(7.11)
where we have used the estimates we established in Theorem 5.1 (rec all that ϕ1
was introduced in Eq. (5.7)). Notice that the ﬁrst summand is of ord er O(ǫ3), while
the term in brackets is of order O(ǫ4).
We can now use the integral equation (7.4c) for the trajectories, the expan-
sion (7.6) for the integrand (together with (7.11)), and the expre ssion for the tra-
jectories up to second order terms (Eqs. (7.9) and (7.10)) to get
θ(s;r0,θ 0) = θ(0)(s) +
∫ s
0
∂θϕ0
ǫ2r2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0+ǫr(1)+O(ǫ2),θ(0)+ǫθ(1)+O(ǫ2))
d¯s
+
∫ s
0
∂θϕ1 − 2ǫκr cosθ∂ θϕ0
ǫ2r2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0+ǫr(1)+O(ǫ2),θ(0)+ǫθ(1)+O(ǫ2))
d¯s + O(ǫ3).
For simplicity of notation, we omit the argument ¯s when there is no risk of confusion.
An elementary Taylor expansion and the mean value theorem show th e ﬁrst integral
(let us call it I1) is given by
I1 =
∫ s
0
[∂θϕ0
ǫ2r2 +∂r
( ∂θϕ0
ǫr2
)
r(1)(¯s) + ∂2
θϕ0
ǫr2 θ(1)(¯s)
] ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0,θ(0))
d¯s + O(ǫ3)
=ǫθ(1)(s) +
∫ s
0
[
∂r
( ∂θϕ0
ǫr2
)
r(1)(¯s) + ∂2
θϕ0
ǫr2 θ(1)(¯s)
] ⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0,θ(0))
d¯s + O(ǫ3).
The second integral, which we call I2, can be immediately simpliﬁed using the mean
value theorem, ﬁnding that
I2 =
∫ s
0
∂θϕ1 − 2ǫκr cosθ∂ θϕ0
ǫ2r2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0,θ(0))
d¯s + O(ǫ3).
The integrals I1 and I2 can be computed in closed form after replacing the
functions ϕ0,ϕ 1 by their expressions, given in Eqs. (5.6) and (5.7). For example,
I2 =J1 +J2 + O(ǫ3),38 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
where
J1 :=
∫ s
0
∂θϕ1
ǫ2r2
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0,θ(0))
d¯s
= ǫ2R1(r0)
r2
0
∫ s
0
[
τ (¯s)κ(¯s)2 cos 2θ(0)(s) +κ(¯s)κ′(¯s) sin 2θ(0)(¯s)
]
d¯s
= ǫ2R1(r0)
2r2
0
∫ s
0
d
d¯s
(
κ(¯s)2 sin 2θ(0)(¯s)
)
d¯s
= 13ǫ2(r2
0 − 2)
96
[
κ(s)2 sin 2θ(0)(s) −κ(0)2 sin 2θ0
]
and
J2 := −2
∫ s
0
κ cosθ∂ θϕ0
ǫr
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
(¯s,r0,θ(0))
d¯s
= − 2ǫ2R0(r0)
r0
∫ s
0
κ cosθ(0)[
τκ cosθ(0) +κ′ sinθ(0)]
d¯s
= −ǫ2R0(r0)
r0
∫ s
0
[
τκ 2 + 1
2
d
d¯s
(
κ2 sin 2θ(0)
) ]
d¯s
= ǫ2(3 −r2
0)
16
[
2
∫ s
0
τκ 2d¯s +κ(s)2 sin 2θ(0)(s) −κ(0)2 sin 2θ0
]
.
The other terms can be dealt with using analogous arguments, arriv ing at the
formula for θ(2)(s) that appears in the statement. □
To conclude this subsection, we will show that the trajectories of t he ﬁeld X on
the invariant torus r = 1 satisfy certain functional equation up to some controllable
errors. The reason why we need to consider this way of describing t rajectories on
the invariant torus is that, in order to compute the rotation numbe r later on, we
will need to understand the trajectories on the torus for arbitra rily large times.
The expression for the trajectories we obtained in Proposition 7.1 is not well suited
for this purpose, while the functional equation below turns out to b e much more
convenient. In order to describe the errors that appear in the fu nctional equation, in
the following proposition we will use the notation s O(ǫn) for any quantity Q(θ0,s )
that is bounded as
⏐
⏐∂j
θ0Q(θ0,s )
⏐
⏐ ⩽ Cj(1 + |s|)ǫn and
⏐
⏐∂s∂j
θ0Q(θ0,s )
⏐
⏐ ⩽ Cjǫn
for nonnegative integer j (we could have considered higher derivatives with respect
to s too, but we will not need this feature).
Proposition 7.2. Consider the trajectories of the system of ODEs (7.3) with ini-
tial condition (α0,r 0,θ 0) = (0 , 1,θ 0). The function θ(s) ≡ θ(s; 1,θ 0) satisﬁes the
approximate functional equation
θ(s) = θ0 +
∫ s
0
τ (¯s)d¯s − ǫ
4
[
κ(s) sinθ(s) −κ(0) sinθ0
]
+s O(ǫ2).
Proof. The starting point is the diﬀerential equations for the trajectorie s (7.3) with
initial radius r0 = 1. It is obvious that the radial component of the trajectory is
r(s; 1,θ 0) = 1 ,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 39
which simply shows that the set {r = 1} is an invariant torus. Therefore, Eq. (7.3c)
for θ(s) becomes
(7.12) ˙θ(s) = τ +ǫ−2Aψθ +τψ α
1 +ψα +τψ θ
+ O(ǫ3) = τ + ǫ−2Aψθ −τ 2ψθ
1 +ψα +τψ θ
+ O(ǫ3),
where the functions in the RHS are evaluated along the trajectorie s (s, 1,θ (s)).
Expanding the fraction that appears in the second identity using th e estimates
for ψ proved in Theorem 5.1 we therefore arrive at
(7.13) ˙θ(s) = τ (s) + ∂θϕ0(s, 1,θ (s))
ǫ2 + O(ǫ2).
Notice that the fraction is of order O(ǫ). Converting (7.12) into an integral equation,
an immediate consequence of this estimate is that
θ(s) = θ(0)(s) +
∫ s
0
∂θϕ0(¯s, 1,θ (¯s))
ǫ2 d¯s +s O(ǫ2).
This integral can be evaluated, modulo s O(ǫ2), using the formula (7.13) for the
derivative ˙θ, the expression for ϕ0, and integration by parts:
∫ s
0
∂θϕ0
ǫ2 d¯s = −ǫ
4
∫ s
0
[
κτ cosθ +κ′ sinθ
]
d¯s
= −ǫ
4
∫ s
0
[
κ( ˙θ + O(ǫ)) cosθ +κ′ sinθ
]
d¯s
= −ǫ
4
∫ s
0
d
d¯s
(
κ sinθ
)
d¯s +s O(ǫ2)
= −ǫ
4
[
κ(s) sinθ(s) −κ(0) sinθ0
]
+s O(ǫ2).
Here, of course, all the integrands are evaluated at the point (¯ s, 1,θ (¯s)). □
7.2. Rotation number of the Poincar´ e map of the local Beltrami ﬁe ld. We
will denote by φs the time-s ﬂow of the ﬁeld X, which maps each point ( α0,r 0,θ 0)
to the trajectory of the ODEs (7.3) at time s that has the latter values as initial
conditions. Since the ﬁeld X, introduced in Eq. (7.2), is tangent to the boundary of
the domain S1
ℓ × D2, it is standard that the ﬂow φs is a well deﬁned diﬀeomorphism
of S1
ℓ × D2 for all values of s.
Let us now consider the Poincar´ e map of the ﬁeldX, which is the tool we will use
to analyze the dynamical properties of the ﬂow (and which coincides with that of
the local Beltrami ﬁeld v). For this, we start by considering the section {α =α0},
which is clearly transverse to the vector ﬁeld X. The Poincar´ e map of this section,
Π α0 :
D2 → D2, sends each point ( r0,θ 0) ∈ D2 to the ﬁrst point at which the
trajectory φs(α0,r 0,θ 0) intersects the section {α = α0} (with s >0). The reason
why we are considering the ﬁeld X is that it is isochronous in the sense that this
ﬁrst return point is given by the time- ℓ ﬂow of X, that is,
(7.14) Π α0 (r0,θ 0) = φℓ(α0,r 0,θ 0).
We will omit the subscript when α0 = 0, and use Cartesian coordinates y in the
disk when convenient.
One should notice that, since we are assuming that the curve γ is analytic, the
boundary of the tube Tǫ is also an analytic surface, so it is standard [24] that40 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
the ﬁeld v is analytic in a neighborhood of the closure
Tǫ. This ensures that the
Poincar´ e map is also a well-deﬁned analytic map in a neighborhood of th e closed
disk D2.
In the following proposition we will show that the Poincar´ e map of the Beltrami
ﬁeld preserves a measure on the disk. For later convenience, we will state this result
in terms of the associated 2-form rather than the measure:
Proposition 7.3. The Poincar´ e mapΠ preserves the positive measure on the disk
corresponding to the 2-form
Λ := GΛ (r,θ )rdr ∧dθ
on the disk D2, with
(7.15) GΛ (r,θ ) := Bvα
⏐
⏐
α=0 = 1 + ǫκ(0)r cosθ + O(ǫ2).
Proof. That the function GΛ (y) := Bvα|α=0 has indeed the form given by the RHS
of (7.15) is an immediate consequence of the estimates for the func tion ψ proved
in Theorem 5.1 and Eq. (7.1). Given a Borel set B ⊂
D2 and a small positive δ, let
us denote by
µ(B) :=
∫
B
Λ
its area and let
Bδ := (−δ,δ ) × B
be a small thickening of the set {0} × B in the closed domain S1
ℓ ×
D2.
Since the divergence of v is zero, from the deﬁnition of X it stems that its ﬂow
preserves the volume
d ˜V :=vαdV .
Clearly the ˜V -volume of the set Bδ is
˜V (Bδ) :=
∫
Bδ
d ˜V =
∫ δ
−δ
∫
B
Bvαdydα
= 2δ
(
1 + O(δ)
) ∫
B
Bvα
⏐
⏐
α=0dy = 2δµ(B) + O(δ2).(7.16)
Let us now observe that the image of the set Bδ under the time-ℓ ﬂow φℓ is given
by
(7.17) φℓ(Bδ) =
⋃
−δ<α<δ
{α} × Π α(B).
By the continuous dependence of the ﬂow on the initial conditions an d Eq. (7.14),
the Poincar´ e maps corresponding to diﬀerent values of the angle α satisfy
‖Π α − Π ‖C 0(D2) ⩽ CδEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 41
for |α| ⩽ δ, so we can use the decomposition (7.17) to show that the ˜V -volume of
φℓ(Bδ) is
˜V (φℓ(Bδ)) =
∫ δ
−δ
∫
Π α(B)
Bvαdydα
=
∫ δ
−δ
( ∫
Π( B)
Bvα
⏐
⏐
α=0dy + O(δ)
)
dα
= 2δµ(Π( B)) + O(δ2).(7.18)
Equating the ˜V -volumes of Bδ and φℓ(Bδ), given by Eqs. (7.16) and (7.18), and
considering small values of δ we then obtain that
µ(B) = µ(Π( B)),
as claimed. □
Since the local Beltrami ﬁeld v is tangent to the boundary of the domain S1
ℓ ×D2,
the image of ∂D2 under the Poincar´ e map Π is also contained in ∂D2. Hence, the
restriction of Π to ∂D2 deﬁnes an analytic diﬀeomorphism of the circle, which will
be denoted by
Π |∂D2 :∂D2 →∂D2.
Using the coordinate θ to identify the circle ∂D2 with R/2πZ, the latter circle
diﬀeomorphism can be naturally lifted to a diﬀeomorphism of the real lin e that we
will denote by ¯Π : R → R. As is well known, a basic tool in the study of circle
diﬀeomorphisms is the rotation number (or frequency) of the map, which is deﬁned
as
(7.19) ωΠ := lim
n→∞
¯Π n(θ0) −θ0
n .
Here ¯Π n denotes the nth iterate of ¯Π and θ0 is any real number. Since the Poincar´ e
map of a ﬂow is homotopic to the identity, it is standard that the abov e limit exists
and is independent of the choice of θ0 [30].
We shall next compute the rotation number of the circle diﬀeomorph ism Π |∂D2
using the functional equation satisﬁed (up to controllable errors) by the trajectories
of the ﬁeld X on the invariant torus. The reason is that, in order to compute the
rotation number to order O(ǫ2), we need to iterate the Poincar´ e map an arbitrarily
large number of times, which requires ﬁne control of the growth of the errors for
large times.
The following theorem asserts that the rotation number is given by t he total
torsion not only modulo O(ǫ), as can be shown without relying on the functional
equation, but also modulo O(ǫ2). The fact that the O(ǫ) correction is zero will be
important later on.
Theorem 7.4. The rotation number of the circle diﬀeomorphism Π |∂D2 is
ωΠ =
∫ ℓ
0
τ (α)dα + O(ǫ2).
Proof. By the deﬁnition of the ﬂow, Eq. (7.19) simply asserts that
ωΠ := lim
n→∞
θ(nℓ) −θ0
n ,42 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
whereθ(nℓ) ≡θ(nℓ; 1,θ 0) denotes the angular component of the trajectory solving
the system (7.3) with initial condition (0 , 1,θ 0), evaluated at time nℓ. Since the
curvatureκ(α) and torsion τ (α) are ℓ-periodic, Proposition 7.2 then ensures that
ωΠ = lim
n→∞
∫ nℓ
0 τds − ǫκ(0)
4 [sinθ(nℓ) − sinθ0
]
+nℓ O(ǫ2)
n =
∫ ℓ
0
τds + O(ǫ2).
□
7.3. The nondegeneracy condition for the Poincar´ e map. In this subsection
we will compute a quantity associated with the Poincar´ e map Π (some times called
the normal torsion of the map) that was introduced to analyze the stability of
individual invariant tori of symplectic diﬀeomorphisms [18, 8]. As we s hall see, the
assumption that the normal torsion is nonzero plays a role that is an alogous to the
twist condition in the classical theorem by Arnold and Moser on pertu rbations of
integrable symplectic maps. As the name can be misleading, it is worth e mphasizing
that, in principle, the normal torsion has nothing to do with the tors ion of a curve.
Let us begin by introducing some notation. We will consider a domain D in the
plane that contains the closed unit disk D2 and a map ˆΠ : D → R2. (Eventually,
we will be interested in taking as ˆΠ the Poincar´ e map Π introduced in the previous
subsection.) A closed curve Γ ⊂ D is invariant if its image ˆΠ(Γ) is contained in
Γ. If Γ is an invariant curve of ˆΠ, one says that ˆΠ |Γ is conjugate to a rotation of
frequency ω through the diﬀeomorphism Θ : S1 → Γ if
Θ −1 ◦ ˆΠ |Γ ◦ Θ(ϑ) = ϑ +ω,
for all ϑ in S1. When Γ = ∂D2, we will abuse the notation and also denote by Θ
the diﬀeomorphism S1 → S1 corresponding to the angular component of the above
diﬀeomorphism S1 →∂D2. (Therefore, in the case of ∂D2 the above diﬀeomorphism
will read as y = (cos Θ( ϑ), sin Θ(ϑ)) in Cartesian coordinates and ( r,θ ) = (1, Θ(ϑ))
in polar coordinates.) From the context it will be clear which interpret ation of Θ
must be considered in each case.
Deﬁnition 7.5. Let ˆΠ :
D2 → D2 be a diﬀeomorphism of the disk that preserves
the measure deﬁned by the 2-form G(r,θ )rdr ∧dθ. We will denote the radial
and angular components of ˆΠ by ( ˆΠ r, ˆΠ θ), respectively. Assume that ˆΠ |∂D2 is a
diﬀeomorphism of the circle ∂D2 →∂D2 that is conjugate to a rotation of frequency
ω through a diﬀeomorphism Θ, which we regard here as a map S1 → S1. The normal
torsion of the map ˆΠ on the invariant circle ∂D2 is the real number
N ˆΠ :=
∫ 2π
0
1
Θ ′(ϑ +ω)Θ ′(ϑ)
∂r ˆΠ θ(1, Θ(ϑ))
G(1, Θ(ϑ)) dϑ.
The reason why we consider the above quantity is that it appears in a nondegen-
eracy condition of a theorem by de la Llave et al. [8]. In fact, the resu lt [8, Theorem
1] is much more general, and we will only need a concrete application th at we state
next in a form that is particularly well suited for our purposes. The n ormal torsion
was also considered for the same purpose by Herman in [18] when G(r,θ ) = 1 and
Θ(ϑ) = ϑ. Before stating the theorem, let us recall that a number ω is Diophantine
if there exist a positive constant C and ν >1 such that
(7.20)
⏐
⏐
⏐ω
2π − p
k
⏐
⏐
⏐ /greaterorequalslantC
k1+νEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 43
for any integers p,k with k /greaterorequalslant1.
Theorem 7.6 (De la Llave et al. [8]). Consider a small neighborhood D of the closed
unit disk D2 in R2. Take an analytic map ˆΠ : D → R2 that is a diﬀeomorphism
onto its image preserving the measure G(r,θ )rdrdθ , with G analytic in D. Suppose
that the following two conditions hold:
(i) The circle ∂D2 is invariant, and ˆΠ |∂D2 is conjugate through an analytic
diﬀeomorphism Θ : S1 →∂D2 to a rotation whose frequency ω satisﬁes a
Diophantine condition.
(ii) The normal torsion N ˆΠ of the map ˆΠ on the invariant circle ∂D2 is
nonzero.
Then for each δ >0 and positive integer m there are δ′ > 0 and an integer k such
that, if an analytic map ˜Π : D → R2 preserving the same measure G(r,θ )rdrdθ
satisﬁes
‖ ˆΠ − ˜Π ‖C k(D) <δ ′,
one can transform the circle ∂D2 by a diﬀeomorphism Ψ of R2 so that Ψ(∂D2) is
an invariant curve for the map ˜Π . Moreover, the map ˜Π |Ψ( ∂D2) is also conjugate to
a rotation of frequency ω and the diﬀerence Ψ − id can be assumed to be supported
in a small neighborhood of ∂D2 and such that
‖Ψ − id‖C m <δ.
Proof. The statement is simply a rewording of [8, Theorem 47], in the particula r
case of planar maps and omitting some quantitative estimates that w ill not be
needed in the rest of the paper. The only point that requires more e laboration is to
check what the degeneracy condition looks like in the situation we are considering
in this section.
For the beneﬁt of the reader, let us give some details about how the statement is
derived from [8, Theorem 47], borrowing some notation from this ref erence without
further mention. The map ˆΠ is obviously symplectic with respect to the analytic
2-form Λ := G(r,θ )rdr ∧dθ. This 2-form is obviously exact, as Λ = dβ with the
smooth 1-form on D
β :=
( ∫ r
0
GΛ (¯r,θ ) ¯rd ¯r
)
dθ.
Moreover, the 1-forms ˆΠ ∗β −β and ˜Π ∗β −β are exact because
∫
∂D2
( ˆΠ ∗β −β) =
∫
D2
(d ˆΠ ∗β −dβ) =
∫
( ˆΠ ∗Λ − Λ) = 0 ,
and analogously for ˜Π.
As before, let us now regard Θ as a diﬀeomorphism of S1. Consider the embed-
ding K : S1 → D given by
K(ϑ) :=
(
cos Θ(ϑ), sin Θ(ϑ)
)
,
which is analytic by hypothesis.
Therefore, the only hypothesis of [8, Theorem 47] that is not immed iate is the
non-degeneracy condition. Let us take Cartesian components ( y1,y 2) in D and call44 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
( ˆΠ 1, ˆΠ 2) the Cartesian components of the map ˆΠ. In the aforementioned reference,
the condition is that the average of the function
S(ϑ) := P (ϑ +ω) ·
[
D ˆΠ(ϑ)J(ϑ)−1P (ϑ)
]
be nonzero, where the dot denotes the Euclidean scalar product. Here P (ϑ) :=
Θ ′(ϑ)−1(− sin Θ(ϑ), cos Θ(ϑ)),
(D ˆΠ) ij(ϑ) := ∂ ˆΠ i
∂yj
(K(ϑ))
is the Jacobian matrix of ˆΠ and
J(ϑ) := G(K(ϑ))
(
0 −1
1 0
)
.
Expressing the Cartesian components in polar coordinates,
ˆΠ 1 = ˆΠ r cos ˆΠ θ, ˆΠ 2 = ˆΠ r sin ˆΠ θ,
we immediately obtain that
S(ϑ) = ∂r ˆΠ r sin( ˆΠ θ − Θ(ϑ +ω)) + ˆΠ r∂r ˆΠ θ cos( ˆΠ θ − Θ(ϑ +ω))
G Θ ′(ϑ)Θ ′(ϑ +ω) ,
where the functions whose argument has not been speciﬁed are ev aluated at K(ϑ).
Since ˆΠ r(K(ϑ)) = 1 because the circle ∂D2 is invariant and, by hypothesis, ˆΠ |∂D2
is conjugate to the rotation of frequency ω through the diﬀeomorphism Θ (i.e.,
ˆΠ θ(K(ϑ)) = Θ( ϑ +ω)
for all ϑ), we get
S(ϑ) = 1
Θ ′(ϑ +ω)Θ ′(ϑ)
∂r ˆΠ θ(K(ϑ))
G(K(ϑ)) .
In view of the way we deﬁned the normal torsion (cf. Deﬁnition 7.5), the statement
then follows immediately from [8, Theorem 47] after realizing that
ˆΠ(K(ϑ)) = K(ϑ +ω).
□
In order to calculate the normal torsion of the Poincar´ e map Π, let us begin by
computing the diﬀeomorphism that conjugates Π |∂D2 to a rotation when its rotation
number satisﬁes a Diophantine condition:
Proposition 7.7. Suppose that the rotation number ωΠ of the Poincar´ e map of
the local Beltrami ﬁeld is Diophantine. Then the circle diﬀe omorphism Π |∂D2 is
conjugate to a rotation of frequency ωΠ through an analytic diﬀeomorphism Θ :
S1 →∂D2 that satisﬁes
Θ(ϑ) = ϑ − ǫκ(0)
4 sinϑ + O(ǫ2).
Proof. As the rotation number ωΠ satisﬁes a Diophantine condition, the map Π |∂D2
is conjugate to a rotation of frequency ωΠ through an analytic diﬀeomorphism Θ [30,
Theorem 1.3]. This diﬀeomorphism can be understood as a change of c oordinates
θ0 = Θ( ϑ).EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 45
Let us now compute the diﬀeomorphism Θ. Writing θ0 = Θ( ϑ), the fact that
ˆΠ |∂D2 is conjugate to a rotation of frequency ωΠ through Θ means that the trajec-
tory θ(ℓ; 1, Θ(ϑ)) at time ℓ corresponds to Θ( ϑ +ωΠ ), for any choice of ϑ. Using
the equation for the trajectory proved in Proposition 7.2 at time ℓ, this means that
Θ must satisfy the equation
(7.21) Θ( ϑ +ωΠ ) = Θ( ϑ) +ωΠ + ǫκ(0)
4
[
sin Θ(ϑ) − sin Θ(ϑ +ωΠ )
]
+ O(ǫ2).
Here we have used the expression for ωΠ proved in Theorem 7.4 (which allows us
to replace
∫ ℓ
0 τd ¯s =ωΠ + O(ǫ2)) and that the function κ is ℓ-periodic.
To analyze this equation, let us write the O(ǫ2) term in the RHS of (7.21)
as R(ϑ). Let us identify ∂D2 with S1 = R/2πZ through the angular coordinate
θ0, so that Θ is regarded as a diﬀeomorphism S1 → S1. With a slight abuse of
notation, let us still denote by Θ its lift R → R. It is standard that this lift can be
written as
(7.22) Θ( ϑ) = ϑ +H(ϑ),
where H(ϑ) is an analytic 2 π-periodic function.
Let us consider the 2 π-periodic function
(7.23) F (ϑ) := H(ϑ) + ǫκ(0)
4 sin Θ(ϑ).
Eq. (7.21) then reads as
(7.24) F (ϑ +ωΠ ) = F (ϑ) +R(ϑ),
with R = O(ǫ2). Consider the Fourier series of the functions F and R:
F (ϑ) =
∞∑
k=−∞
ˆFk eikϑ, R (ϑ) =
∞∑
k=−∞
ˆRk eikϑ.
Eq. (7.24) then asserts that for any nonzero integer k the Fourier coeﬃcients of F
and R are related through the identity
(7.25) ˆFk =
ˆRk
eikωΠ − 1.
We can obviously take ˆF0 = 0; moreover, ˆR0 = 0 because it is a necessary condition
for the existence of the diﬀeomorphism Θ.
Since ωΠ satisﬁes the Diophantine condition (7.20), for large integer values o f k
we have the elementary inequality
|eikωΠ − 1|>C |k|−ν,
so that from Eq. (7.25) the H m norm of F can be estimated by
‖F ‖Hm ⩽ C
( ∞∑
k=−∞
(1 +k2)m|k|2ν| ˆRk|2
) 1
2
⩽ C‖R‖Hm+ν ⩽ Cmǫ2
for any nonnegative integer m. To derive the last inequality, which shows that
F = O(ǫ2), we have used that R = O(ǫ2). In view of Eqs. (7.22) and (7.23), this
ensures that
Θ(ϑ) = ϑ − ǫκ(0)
4 sin Θ(ϑ) + O(ǫ2).46 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
In turn, this readily leads to the expression for the diﬀeomorphism Θ provided in
the statement. □
We are ready to provide a closed formula for the normal torsion of t he Poincar´ e
map, up to terms of order O(ǫ3). The leading term only depends on the geometry
of the curve (through its curvature and torsion) and, as is to be e xpected, not on
the section of S1
ℓ × D2 we used to deﬁne the Poincar´ e map:
Theorem 7.8. Suppose that the rotation number ωΠ satisﬁes a Diophantine con-
dition. Then the normal torsion of the Poincar´ e map of the lo cal Beltrami ﬁeld v
on the invariant circle ∂D2 is
NΠ = − 5πǫ2
8
∫ ℓ
0
κ(α)2τ (α)dα + O(ǫ3).
Proof. By deﬁnition, the normal torsion is
NΠ :=
∫ 2π
0
1
Θ ′(ϑ +ωΠ )Θ ′(ϑ)
∂rΠ θ(1, Θ(ϑ))
GΛ (1, Θ(ϑ)) dϑ,
where Π θ(r,θ ) is the angular component of the Poincar´ e map, Θ(ϑ) is the diﬀeomor-
phism deﬁned in Proposition 7.7 (considered as a map S1 → S1) and the function
GΛ (r,θ ) is given by Eq. (7.15).
We have already computed all the terms we need to evaluate the inte grand up
to an O(ǫ3) error. Indeed, from Propositions 7.1, 7.3 and 7.7 and Theorem 7.4 it
stems that, setting T :=
∫ ℓ
0 τ (α)dα,
ωΠ =T + O(ǫ2),
Θ ′(ϑ) = 1 − ǫκ(0)
4 cosϑ + O(ǫ2),
Θ ′(ϑ +ωΠ ) = 1 − ǫκ(0)
4 cos(ϑ +T ) + O(ǫ2),
GΛ (1, Θ(ϑ)) = 1 + ǫκ(0) cosϑ + O(ǫ2)
∂Π θ
∂r (1, Θ(ϑ)) = ǫ∂θ (1)
∂r0
(
ℓ; 1,ϑ − ǫκ(0)
4 sinϑ
)
+ǫ2∂θ (2)
∂r0
(ℓ; 1,ϑ ) + O(ǫ3),
the functions θ(j)(s;r0,θ 0) being in Proposition 7.1. Plugging these expressions in
the integral for the normal torsion and using trigonometric identit ies, one arrives
at the expression
NΠ =
∫ 2π
0
[ǫκ(0)
2
(
sin(ϑ +T ) − sinϑ
)
− 5ǫ2
16
∫ 2π
0
κ(α)2τ (α)dα
+ 5κ2ǫ2
48 sinT cos(2ϑ +T ) + O(ǫ3)
]
dϑ
= − 5πǫ2
8
∫ 2π
0
κ2τdα + O(ǫ3),
as claimed. □EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 47
7.4. A KAM theorem for generic tubes. In this subsection we will use the pre-
vious results to prove a theorem on the preservation of invariant t ori for divergence-
free vector ﬁelds that are close to the local Beltrami ﬁeld v for small enough ǫ. As
we shall see, the hypotheses of the KAM theorem will hold true as lon g as the core
curve γ of the tube satisﬁes certain generic geometric conditions. Details o n the
validity of these conditions are given below.
Since the local Beltrami ﬁeld v is analytic in a neighborhood of the closure of
the tube, which we identify with S1
ℓ × D2 via the coordinates ( α,y ), we can assume
that v is deﬁned in some domain S1
ℓ × D , with D a neighborhood of the closed
unit disk in the plane. To measure the smallness of a ﬁeld, we will use the norm
‖u‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D), which we deﬁne in terms of its components in the coordinates ( α,y )
as
‖u‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D) := ‖uα‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D) + ‖uy‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D).
We will sometimes ﬁnd it convenient to refer to a domain bounded by an invariant
torus as an invariant tube of the ﬁeld. We say that a ﬁeld u is orbitally conjugate
to a rotation of frequency ω on an invariant torus Σ if there are global coordinates
(˜α, ˜θ) : Σ → S1 × S1 in which the vector ﬁeld is linear with frequency ω up to a
multiplicative factor, that is,
u|Σ =F (˜α, ˜θ)
(
∂ ˜α +ω∂ ˜θ
)
,
where F : S1 × S1 → R is a nonvanishing function.
In the following lemma we will show that, for a generic core curve γ, the rotation
number of the Poincar´ e map of the local Beltrami ﬁeld is Diophantineand its normal
torsion is nonzero. To make precise what we understand by “gener ic”, we will say
that certain property holds for a Cm-dense set of closed analytic curves if, given
any closed analytic curve γ in R3, one can deform it by a diﬀeomorphism Φ of R3,
with ‖Φ − id‖C m(R3) as small as one wishes, so that the curve Φ( γ) has the desired
property. Notice that this does not imply that the property holds f or an open set
of curves.
Lemma 7.9. Let m be any positive integer. The set of closed analytic curves fo r
which the Poincar´ e map of the local Beltrami ﬁeld v has a Diophantine rotation
number ωΠ and nonzero normal torsion NΠ on the invariant circle ∂D2 is Cm-
dense.
Proof. The result is not hard to prove using the expressions for the rotat ion number
and the normal torsion derived in Theorems 7.4 and 7.8:
ωΠ =
∫ ℓ
0
τdα + O(ǫ2),
NΠ = − 5πǫ2
8
∫ ℓ
0
κ2τdα + O(ǫ3).
A way of making things precise is the following. We will consider deforma tions
of the curve γ, labeled by a parameter δ. More concretely, let us denote by
(T (α),N (α),B (α)) the Frenet trihedron of the curve γ at the point γ(α) (one
should not mistake the binormal vector B(α) for the function B that we intro-
duced in Eq. (3.6), which will not be used in this proof). Let F (α) be an analytic48 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
ℓ-periodic function and consider the family of curves Γ( α,δ ) in R3 given by
Γ(α,δ ) := γ(α) +δF (α)B(α).
If δ is close to zero, γδ ≡ Γ( ·,δ ) is a closed analytic curve. Notice that, for δ ⁄= 0,
α is no longer an arc-length parametrization of γδ but, due to the properties of the
binormal ﬁeld,
|Γ ′| = 1 + O(δ2).
Here and in what follows, we denote by a prime the derivatives with res pect to α.
In particular, the length of γδ is ℓ + O(δ2). We will label the geometric quantities
associated with the curve γδ with a subscript δ (e.g., κδ and τδ for its curvature
and torsion).
The results we have presented in this section carry over immediately when one
does not only consider the tube Tǫ associated with the curve γ, but the family of
tubes Tǫ(γδ). The dependence of the various quantities on the small paramete r δ
is smooth and can be controlled easily. A tedious but straightforwar d computation
using the well-known formulas for the curvature and torsion of a pa rametrized curve
shows that
κ2
δ =κ2 + 2δκ(2F ′τ +Fτ ′) + O(δ2),
τδ =τ −δ
[
κF ′ + d
dα
( F ′′ −τ 2F
κ
)]
+ O(δ2).
Since the length of γδ diﬀers from ℓ by an O(δ2) term, one readily ﬁnds that the
rotation number of the Poincar´ e map Π δ associated with the harmonic ﬁeld of the
tube Tǫ(γδ) is
ωΠ δ =
∫ ℓ
0
τδ(α)dα + O(ǫ2 +δ2)
=ωΠ +δ
∫ ℓ
0
κ′(α)F (α)dα + O(ǫ2 +δ2).
Similarly, the dependence of the normal torsion on δ can be shown to be
NΠ δ = NΠ − 5πδǫ 2
8
∫ ℓ
0
(2κ′′′ + 3κ2κ′ − 6κττ ′ − 6τ 2κ′)Fdα + O(δ2 +ǫ3).
We recall that, although the Poincar´ e map Π δ depends smoothly on the parame-
ter δ, the terms O(ǫ2 +δ2) and O(δ2 +ǫ3) are continuous, but possibly not diﬀer-
entiable, functions of δ.
Perturbing the curve γ a little if necessary to ensure that the functions κ′ and
2κ′′′ + 3κ2κ′ − 6κττ ′ − 6τ 2κ′
are not identically zero, we deduce that the function F can be chosen so that the
integrals
∫ ℓ
0
κ′Fdα and
∫ ℓ
0
(2κ′′′ + 3κ2κ′ − 6κττ ′ − 6τ 2κ′)Fdα
are nonzero. For small enough ǫ this ensures that, as δ takes values in a small
enough interval ( −δ0,δ 0), the values taken by the continuous function ωΠ δ (resp.
NΠ δ ) cover an interval centered at ωΠ (resp. NΠ ) of radius Cδ 0 (resp.Cǫ 2δ0). Since
Diophantine numbers have full Lebesgue measure, this immediately im plies thatEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 49
one can choose an arbitrarily small δ such that the rotation number ωΠ δ satisﬁes a
Diophantine condition and the normal torsion NΠ δ is nonzero. □
We can now show that, for a generic core curve γ and small enough ǫ, a suitably
small perturbation of the local Beltrami ﬁeld still has an invariant to rus that is
close to the original one:
Theorem 7.10. For any positive integer m there is a Cm-dense set of closed
analytic curves γ with the following KAM-type property: for any δ > 0, there is
another positive integer k and some δ′ > 0 such that any analytic divergence-free
vector ﬁeld u whose diﬀerence with the local Beltrami ﬁeld v of the tube Tǫ ≡ Tǫ(γ)
is bounded by
(7.26) ‖u −v‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D) <δ ′
possesses an invariant tube. Furthermore, one can ﬁnd a diﬀe omorphism Ψ of R3,
with ‖Ψ − id‖C m(R3) < δ and Ψ − id supported in a small neighborhood of the
torus ∂Tǫ, such that Ψ( Tǫ) is an invariant tube of u and u is orbitally conjugate on
the invariant torus ∂Ψ( Tǫ) to a Diophantine rotation.
Proof. By Lemma 7.9, we can deform the curve that lies at the core of the tu be
Tǫ by a diﬀeomorphism of R3, arbitrarily close to the identity in the Cm norm, so
that, if we consider the local Beltrami ﬁeld (which we still denote by v) associated
to the deformed tube, its rotation number ωΠ satisﬁes a Diophantine condition and
its normal torsion NΠ is nonzero. As before, we will identify this deformed tube
with the domain S1
ℓ × D2 through adapted coordinates ( α,y ).
Consider the Poincar´ e map Π of the local Beltrami ﬁeld v, which can be safely
considered as a diﬀeomorphism Π from D onto its image, with D a neighborhood
of the closed unit disk
D2. The Poincar´ e map of the ﬁeld u, also deﬁned on the
section {α = 0}, is another diﬀeomorphism of D onto its image that we will denote
by ˜Π. The vector ﬁelds u and v being close by (7.26), it is apparent that
(7.27) ‖Π − ˜Π ‖C k(D)<Cδ ′
as the Poincar´ e map is simply obtained by integrating the associated vector ﬁeld
along a trajectory between two consecutive intersections with th e section {α =
0}. To avoid cumbersome notations related to the intersection of the domains of
auxiliary maps, wherever appropriate we will assume that the Poinca r´ e maps are
deﬁned in a domain slightly larger than D without further mention. Obviously
there is no loss of generality in this assumption.
We have seen in Proposition 7.3 that the Poincar´ e map Π preserves t he 2-form
Λ = GΛ (r,θ )rdr ∧dθ, where
GΛ (r,θ ) := Bvα
⏐
⏐
α=0 = 1 + O(ǫ),
and vα denotes the α-component of the local Beltrami ﬁeld v. Mimicking the
proof of this proposition, we immediately obtain that the Poincar´ e m ap ˜Π of the
divergence-free ﬁeld u preserves the 2-form ˜Λ := G˜Λ (r,θ )rdr ∧dθ, with
G˜Λ (r,θ ) := Buα
⏐
⏐
α=0.
Notice that uα does not vanish in {0} × D because the diﬀerence |uα −vα| is small
and the α-component of the local Beltrami ﬁeld is close to 1.50 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
Our next goal is to relate the above invariant 2-forms to apply Theo rem 7.6.
More concretely, we will show that there is a Cm-small diﬀeomorphism Φ such that
(7.28) Λ = Φ ∗ ˜Λ ,
where Φ ∗ is the pullback of the diﬀeomorphism. This will be done using Moser’s
trick. We start by noticing that the diﬀerence between these 2-fo rms is obviously
exact, as
Λ − ˜Λ = dΓ
with the 1-form Γ given by
Γ :=
( ∫ r
0
[
GΛ (¯r,θ ) −G˜Λ (¯r,θ )
]
¯rd ¯r
)
dθ.
Although we are making computations in polar coordinates, it is readily seen that
all the objects we are considering are well-deﬁned also at the origin, and therefore
determine smooth forms in the whole disk D.
Consider the non-autonomous vector ﬁeld of class C∞
Zs :=
∫ r
0 [GΛ (¯r,θ ) −G˜Λ (¯r,θ )] ¯rd ¯r
r[(1 −s)GΛ (r,θ ) +sG ˜Λ (r,θ )]∂r,
where s will be the ﬂow parameter. It should be noticed that, by the assump tions
on the vector ﬁelds, the denominator behaves as r + O(r2) while the numerator is
of order O(r2). The ﬁeld Zs satisﬁes the Cm bound
(7.29) ‖Zs‖C m(D)<Cδ ′
for all s ∈ [0, 1] as a consequence of the estimate (7.26).
The time-s ﬂow of the non-autonomous ﬁeld Zs, which will be denoted by φs, is
given by the solution to the initial value problem
∂
∂sφsx =Zs(φsx), φ 0x =x.
Consider the s-dependent 2-form
Λ s := (1 −s)Λ + s ˜Λ .
A simple computation shows that
(7.30) ∂
∂s
(
φ∗
sΛ s
)
=φ∗
s
( ∂
∂s Λ s +LZsΛ s
)
=φ∗
s
( ˜Λ − Λ + diZsΛ s
)
= 0,
where LZs denotes the Lie derivative along Zs and the last equality follows imme-
diately from the deﬁnition of Λ s and the fact that the interior product of Zs with
Λ s is
iZsΛ s = Γ .
Therefore, if we set Φ := φ1, we obtain Eq. (7.28) from (7.30) and the deﬁnition of
Λ s. Moreover,
(7.31) ‖Φ − id‖C m(D)<Cδ ′
because Φ is the time-1 ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld Zs, whose Cm norm is controlled by
Eq. (7.29).
Let us now consider the map
ˆΠ := Φ −1 ◦ ˜Π ◦ Φ ,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 51
which is a diﬀeomorphism from a neighborhood of D2 (which we still take as D)
onto its image. We shall next relate the new map ˆΠ to the Poincar´ e map Π. By the
deﬁnition of Φ and the relation between the invariant 2-forms (7.28) , the map ˆΠ
preserves the same 2-form Λ as the Poincar´ e map Π, and ˆΠ is close to Π by (7.31):
(7.32)
‖
‖Π − ˆΠ
‖
‖
C m(D)<Cδ ′.
We are now ready to apply Theorem 7.6 with the maps Π and ˆΠ. Indeed, the
previous arguments and the way we have deformed the curve γ ensure that the
following statements hold true:
(i) The rotation number ωΠ satisﬁes a Diophantine condition, so the map
Π |∂D2 is analytically conjugate to a rotation of frequency ωΠ (cf. Proposi-
tion 7.7).
(ii) The normal torsion NΠ is nonzero.
(iii) The Ck norm of Π − ˆΠ is at most Cδ ′ by Eq. (7.32), with δ′ arbitrarily
small.
Hence Theorem 7.6 ensures that, for any given integer m, if the integer k is large
enough and δ′ is suﬃciently small there is a diﬀeomorphism ˆΨ of D with ˆΨ − id
arbitrarily small in the Cm(D) norm and supported in a neighborhood of ∂D2 such
that the curve ˆΨ(∂D2) is invariant under the map ˆΠ. Furthermore, the restriction
of ˆΠ to this invariant curve, ˆΠ | ˆΨ( ∂D2), also has rotation number ωΠ .
The deﬁnition of ˆΠ then ensures that the curve Φ ◦ ˆΨ(∂D2) is invariant under
the Poincar´ e map˜Π of the ﬁeld u. (As an aside, notice that this invariant curve is
close to ∂D2 but, in principle, is not contained in the closure of D2, which is the
reason why we are considering a slightly larger disk D throughout the proof.) It is
standard that this is equivalent to saying that there is an invariant t orus of u whose
intersection with the disk {α = 0} is precisely the aforementioned curve. Since the
Cm(D) norm of the diﬀeomorphism Φ ◦ ˆΨ is arbitrarily small by the properties of ˆΨ
and Eq. (7.31), one can take a diﬀeomorphism ¯Ψ of S1
ℓ × D such that ¯Ψ( S1
ℓ ×∂D2) is
an invariant torus of the ﬁeld u and ¯Ψ −id is small in the Cm norm and is supported
in a neighborhood of S1
ℓ ×D2. Indeed, this diﬀeomorphism can be deﬁned as follows.
Take the solution to the system of ODEs
dr
dα = ur(α,r,θ )
uα(α,r,θ ),
dθ
dα = uθ(α,r,θ )
uα(α,r,θ ),
with the trajectory ( r,θ ) parametrized by the angle α and depending on the ini-
tial conditions ( r0,θ 0). Consider the function ϕα mapping the initial conditions
(r0,θ 0) to its time- α ﬂow (r(α;r0,θ 0),θ (α;r0,θ 0)). Then it is easy to check that
the diﬀeomorphism ¯Ψ is given, in polar coordinates, by
¯Ψ(α,r,θ ) :=
(
α,ϕ α ◦ Φ ◦ ˆΨ(r,θ )
)
.
Actually, this formula simply asserts that the intersection of the inv ariant torus of
the ﬁeld u with each section {α =α0}, understood as a curve in the disk D, is the
image under ϕα0 of the invariant curve Φ ◦ ˆΨ(∂D2) at {α = 0}. Clearly the formula52 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
for ¯Ψ and the estimates for the maps Φ and ˆΨ imply that
‖ ¯Ψ − id‖C m(S1
ℓ ×D) ⩽ C‖Φ ◦ ˆΨ − id‖C m(D)
can be made arbitrarily small.
To complete the proof of the theorem, it suﬃces to recall that the map ˆΠ | ˆΨ( ∂D2)
has rotation number ωΠ . This implies that the Poincar´ e map ˜Π of the vector ﬁeld u,
restricted to the invariant curve Φ ◦ ˆΨ(∂D2), also has rotation number ωΠ , which
trivially implies that the vector ﬁeld u itself is orbitally conjugate to a rotation of
frequency ωΠ on the invariant torus ¯Ψ( S1
ℓ ×∂D2). The existence of the diﬀeomor-
phism Ψ of R3 that appears in the statement of the theorem is then immediate. □
Remark 7.11. Ultimately, Theorem 7.10 is a result on the preservation of invariant
tori for small perturbations of the harmonic ﬁeld h, rather than of the local Beltrami
ﬁeld v. Indeed, if we had considered a Beltrami ﬁeld with small but otherwis e
arbitrary parameter λ (possibly 0), we would have found the same expressions for
the rotation number and normal torsion of its Poincar´ e map, the o nly change being
that the error terms would be O(ǫ2 + |λ|) and O(ǫ3 + |λ|), respectively.
We will conclude this section with a result on the persistence of anoth er invariant
set: we will show that, for an open and dense set of core curves γ and small enough
ǫ, any divergence-free vector ﬁeld that is a small perturbation of t he local Beltrami
ﬁeld v has an elliptic periodic trajectory close to the core curve γ. We recall
that a periodic trajectory is elliptic if the nontrivial eigenvalues of the associated
monodromy matrix have all unit modulus but are diﬀerent from 1.
Proposition 7.12. Suppose that the total torsion of the curve γ satisﬁes
∫ ℓ
0
τ (α)dα ⁄=nπ
for all integers n. Then for any δ > 0, there exists some δ′ > 0 such that any
divergence-free vector ﬁeld u in the tube Tǫ which is close to the local Beltrami
ﬁeld v in the sense that
‖u −v‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <δ ′.
also has an elliptic periodic trajectory diﬀeomorphic to th e curve {y = 0 }. More-
over, the corresponding diﬀeomorphism Ψ is bounded by
‖Ψ − id‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <δ
and is diﬀerent from the identity only in a small neighborhoo d of the curve {y = 0}.
Proof. From the expressions (5.2)–(5.4) for the harmonic ﬁeld h, the estimates for
the functionψ proved in Theorem 5.1 and the connection between the local Beltram i
ﬁeld and h (see Eq. (7.1)), we infer that the diﬀerence v − ˜
h0 can be estimated as
‖v − ˜
h0‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <C kǫ,
with the vector ﬁeld ˜h0 deﬁned as
˜h0 :=∂α +τ (α) (y1∂2 −y2∂1).
It is clear that (α(s),y (s)) = (s, 0) is an ℓ-periodic trajectory of the ﬁeld ˜h0. Setting
T :=
∫ ℓ
0
τ (α)dα,EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 53
an easy computation shows that the monodromy matrix of this traj ectory for the
ﬁeld ˜h0 is 

1 0 0
0 cos T − sinT
0 sin T cosT

 .
The nontrivial eigenvalues of this matrix are e ±iT , and hence diﬀerent from ±1 by
the hypotheses of the theorem, thus showing that {y = 0 } is an elliptic trajectory
of ˜h0.
It is then standard that any divergence-free ﬁeld u that is close enough to ˜h0
(say, ‖u − ˜
h0‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <δ 1)) has an elliptic periodic trajectory given by the image
of {y = 0 } under a diﬀeomorphism Ψ with ‖Ψ − id‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) < δ. There is no
loss of generality in assuming that Ψ − id is supported in a small neighborhood of
{y = 0}. Since
‖u − ˜h0‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) < ‖u −v‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) + ‖v − ˜h0‖C k(S1
ℓ ×D2) <δ ′ +Ckǫ,
the theorem then follows by taking ǫ and δ′ small enough. □
8. Approximation by Beltrami fields with decay
In this section we prove a result that allows us to approximate a ﬁeld v that
satisﬁes the Beltrami equation
curlv =λv
on a neighborhood of a compact set S, by a global Beltrami ﬁeld u, which satisﬁes
curlu =λu
in the whole space R3 and falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as 1 /|x|. Throughout we will assume
that the complement R3\S is a connected set. It is not hard to see that this
condition is necessary.
It will be more convenient for us to work with an auxiliary elliptic equatio n
instead of considering the Beltrami equation directly. To this end, le t us denote by
G(x) := cosλ|x|
4π|x|
the Green’s function of the operator ∆ + λ2 in R3, which satisﬁes the distributional
equation
∆ G +λ2G = −δ0
withδ0 the Dirac measure supported at 0. We will use the notation BR for the ball
in R3 centered at the origin and of radius R.
The following lemma, which shows how to “sweep” the singularities of th e
Green’s function, will be used in the demonstration of the global app roximation
theorem. Its proof is based on a duality argument and the Hahn–Ba nach theorem.
Lemma 8.1. TakeR> 0 and consider a domain U ⊂ R3\B2R and a compact set
S ⊂ BR whose complement R3\S is connected. Let us consider the vector ﬁeld
v(x) :=
M∑
m=1
ρmG(x −xm),54 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
where {xm}M
m=1 is a ﬁnite set of points in BR\S and ρm ∈ R3 are constant vectors.
Then, for any δ > 0, there is a ﬁnite set of points {zj}J
j=1 in the domain U and
constant vectors cj ∈ R3 such that the ﬁnite linear combination
(8.1) w(x) :=
J∑
j=1
cjG(x −zj)
approximates the ﬁeld v uniformly in S as
‖v −w‖C 0(S) <δ.
Proof. Consider the space U of all vector ﬁelds that are linear combinations of the
form (8.1), where the points zj belong to the set U and the coeﬃcients cj ∈ R3
are constant vectors. Restricting these ﬁelds to the set S, U can be regarded as a
subspace of the Banach space C0(S, R3) of continuous vector ﬁelds on S.
By the Riesz–Markov theorem, the dual of C0(S, R3) is the space M(S, R3) of
the ﬁnite vector-valued Borel measures on R3 whose support is contained in the
setS. Let us take any measure µ ∈ M(S, R3) such that
∫
R3f ·dµ = 0 for all f ∈ U .
Let us now deﬁne a ﬁeld F ∈L1
loc(R3, R3) as
F (x) :=
∫
R3
G(x − ˜x)dµ(˜x),
so that F satisﬁes the equation
∆ F +λ2F = −µ.
Notice thatF is identically zero on the open set U by the deﬁnition of the measure µ,
that R3\S is connected and that F satisﬁes the elliptic equation
∆ F +λ2F = 0
in R3\S. Hence the unique continuation theorem ensures that the ﬁeld F vanishes
on the complement of S. It then follows that the measure µ also annihilates any
ﬁeld of the form ρmG(x −xm) because, as the points xm do not belong to S,
0 = F (xm) ·ρm =
∫
R3
G(x −xm)ρm ·dµ(x).
Therefore ∫
R3
v ·dµ = 0,
which implies that v can be uniformly approximated on S by elements of the sub-
space U as a consequence of the Hahn–Banach theorem. The lemma then fo l-
lows. □
As an intermediate step before proving the global approximation re sult for the
Beltrami equation, we will establish the following proposition on the ap proximation
of solutions to the elliptic equation ∆ v = −λ2v by solutions deﬁned in a large ball.
Throughout, we will say that a diﬀerential equation holds in a closed s et if it holds
in a neighborhood of this set.
Proposition 8.2. Letv be a vector ﬁeld which satisﬁes the equation
(8.2) ∆ v = −λ2vEXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 55
in a compact subset S of R3. Assume that its complement R3\S is connected and
that S is contained in the ball BR. Then for any δ >0 and any positive integer k
there is a vector ﬁeld w satisfying the equation
∆ w = −λ2w
in BR that approximates the ﬁeld v in S as
(8.3) ‖v −w‖C k(S) <δ.
Hereδ is any ﬁxed positive constant.
Proof. By hypothesis, there is an open subset Ω ⊃S such that the ﬁeld v satisﬁes
the equation (8.2) in Ω. We can assume that Ω is contained in the ball BR. Let us
take a smooth function χ : R3 → R equal to 1 in a closed set S′ ⊂ Ω whose interior
contains S and identically zero outside Ω. Deﬁning a smooth extension ˜ v of the
ﬁeld v to Rn by setting ˜v :=χv, we obviously have
(8.4) ˜ v(x) =
∫
R3
G(x − ˜x)ρ(˜x)d˜x
with ρ := −∆˜v −λ2˜v.
The vector ﬁeld ρ is necessarily supported in Ω \S′. Therefore, an easy continuity
argument ensures that one can approximate the integral (8.4) in t he compact set S′
by a ﬁnite Riemann sum of the form
ˆv(x) :=
M∑
m=1
ρmG(x −xm)
so that, for any constant δ′ > 0,
‖˜v − ˆv‖C 0(S′) <δ ′.
Here ρm are constant vectors in R3 and xm are points that lie in Ω \S′.
Let us take a domain U ⊂ R3\B2R. Lemma 8.1 asserts that there is a vector
ﬁeld of the form
w(x) :=
J∑
j=1
cjG(x −zj)
such that
‖ˆv −w‖C 0(S′) <δ ′,
where {zj}J
j=1 is a ﬁnite set of points in U and cj ∈ R3 are constant vectors.
Therefore,
(8.5) ‖v −w‖C 0(S′) < 2δ′.
To complete the proof of the proposition, notice that the ﬁeld v satisﬁes
∆ v +λ2v = 0
in the set S′ (whose interior contains S) and w satisﬁes the same equation in the
ball B2R. By standard elliptic estimates, it follows that the C0 approximation (8.5)
can be promoted to the Ck bound
‖v −w‖C k(S) <C kδ′.
Choosing δ′ small enough, the result follows. □56 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
We are now ready to prove the global approximation theorem for th e Beltrami
equation with solutions that decay at inﬁnity. To construct these s olutions, we will
truncate a suitable series representation for the ﬁelds in a large ba ll obtained using
Proposition 8.2 and act on them using a convenient diﬀerential opera tor.
Theorem 8.3. Letv be a vector ﬁeld that satisﬁes the Beltrami equation
curlv =λv
in a compact set S ⊂ R3, where λ is a nonzero constant and the complement R3\S
is connected. Then there is a global Beltrami ﬁeld u, satisfying the equation
curlu =λu
in R3, which falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as |Dju(x)|<C j/|x| and approximates the ﬁeld v
in the Ck norm as
‖u −v‖C k(S) <δ.
Hereδ is any positive constant.
Proof. Let us assume that the compact set S is contained in the ball BR/2. As the
Beltrami ﬁeld v satisﬁes the equation
∆ v +λ2v = 0
inS, by Proposition 8.2 there is a ﬁeld w satisfying
(8.6) ∆ w +λ2w = 0
in the ball BR and such that
(8.7) ‖v −w‖C k+2(S) <δ ′.
Let us take spherical coordinates ( r,θ,ϕ ) in the ball BR. Writing the ﬁeld w as
a series of spherical harmonics and using the equation (8.6) we immed iately obtain
thatw can be written as a series
w =
∞∑
l=0
l∑
m=−l
clmjl(λr)Ylm(θ,ϕ ).
Herejl is the spherical Bessel function, Ylm are the spherical harmonics and clm ∈
R3 are constant vectors. Therefore, given any δ′ > 0 there is an integer L such that
the ﬁnite sum
ˆu :=
L∑
l=0
l∑
m=−l
clmjl(λr)Ylm(θ,ϕ )
approximates the ﬁeld w in L2 sense:
(8.8) ‖ˆu −w‖L2(BR) <δ ′.
By the properties of spherical Bessel functions, the vector ﬁeld ˆu satisﬁes the equa-
tion
(8.9) ∆ˆ u +λ2 ˆu = 0
in R3 and falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as |Dj ˆu(x)|<C j/|x|.
In view of Eqs. (8.6) and (8.9), standard elliptic estimates allow us to p ass from
the L2 bound (8.8) to Ck+2 estimate
‖ˆu −w‖C k+2(BR/2) <C kδ′.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 57
From this inequality and the bound (8.7) we infer
(8.10) ‖ˆu −v‖C k+2(S) <Cδ ′.
Let us now set
u := curl curl ˆu +λ curl ˆu
2λ2 .
A simple computation shows that the vector ﬁeld thus deﬁned satisﬁ es the Beltrami
equation
curlu =λu
in R3 and falls oﬀ as |Dju(x)|<C j/|x| by the properties of ˆu. Moreover,
‖u −v‖C k(S) =
‖
‖
‖
‖
curl curl ˆu +λ curl ˆu
2λ2 −v
‖
‖
‖
‖
C k(S)
=
‖
‖
‖
‖
(curl +λ) curl(ˆu −v)
2λ2
‖
‖
‖
‖
C k(S)
⩽ C‖ˆu −v‖C k+2(S)
<Cδ ′,
as we wanted to prove. □
Remark 8.4. The fall-oﬀ at inﬁnity of the global Beltrami ﬁeld u is obtained from the
truncation of the explicit series representation for the auxiliary ﬁe ldw. This is the
reason why Theorem 8.3 does not work in arbitrary open Riemannian 3 -manifolds,
unlike the approximation theorem we used in [11]. Notice that the latte r theorem
does not yield any control at inﬁnity whatsoever for the global Belt rami ﬁelds.
9. Proof of the main theorem
We are now ready to give the proof of Theorem 1.1. Let us begin by co nsidering
one of the curves (say, γ1) in the statement of the theorem. By perturbing this
curve with a Cm-small diﬀeomorphism if necessary, we can assume that γ1 is an
analytic curve whose curvature κ does not vanish anywhere [5, p. 184], and that its
total torsion satisﬁes ∫ ℓ
0
τ (α)dα ⁄=πk
for all integers k. As before, ℓ denotes the length of the curve γ1. It is worth
emphasizing that, as these conditions are open, they are obviously preserved if we
deform the curve γ1 with a diﬀeomorphism that is close enough to the identity in
the Cm norm (m /greaterorequalslant3).
Let us consider the tube Tǫ(γ1) of core curve γ1 and thickness ǫ, and the corre-
sponding harmonic ﬁeld h, given by the expression (5.3) in the coordinates ( α,y )
adapted to the tube. Throughout we will assume that ǫ is small enough. By The-
orem 6.8, we can consider the associated local Beltrami ﬁeld v1, which is given by
the only solution to the Beltrami equation with parameter λ =ǫ3,
curlv1 =ǫ3v1,
in the tube Tǫ(γ1) that is tangent to the boundary and whose harmonic part is
the ﬁeld h. (Notice that in this section v1 will not stand for the component of a
vector ﬁeld in the direction of the coordinate y1.) Since the boundary of the tube58 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
is analytic, it is well known [24] that the local Beltrami ﬁeld v1 is analytic in the
closure of a small neighborhood Ω 1 of
Tǫ(γ1).
Since the total torsion of the curve is not an integral multiple of π, Theorem 7.10
and Proposition 7.12 ensure that, given any δ >0, we can deform the curve γ1 by a
diﬀeomorphism of R3 arbitrarily close to the identity in the Cm norm so that any
divergence-free vector ﬁeld u in Ω 1 with
‖u −v1‖C k(Ω 1) <δ ′
has:
• An invariant tube given by Ψ 1[Tǫ(γ1)].
• An elliptic periodic trajectory given by ˜Ψ 1(γ1).
Moreover, on the invariant torus ∂Ψ 1[Tǫ(γ1)], the ﬁeld u is orbitally conjugate to a
Diophantine rotation, and therefore ergodic. Here Ψ 1 and ˜Ψ 1 are diﬀeomorphisms
of R3 with
‖Ψ 1 − id‖C m(R3) + ‖ ˜Ψ 1 − id‖C m(R3) <δ
and such that the diﬀerences Ψ 1 − id and ˜Ψ 1 − id are supported on small neighbor-
hoods U1, ˜U1 of∂Tǫ(γ1) and γ1, respectively. The constants k andδ′ depend on m,
δ and on the geometry of the curve γ1.
We can apply the same argument for each curve γi (1 ⩽ i ⩽ N ), thereby ob-
taining (for small enough ǫ) a collection of local Beltrami ﬁelds vi, satisfying the
equation
curlvi =ǫ3vi
in the closure of a neighborhood Ω i of the closed tube Tǫ(γi) and such that any
divergence-free vector ﬁeld u in Ω i with ‖u −vi‖C k(Ω i) <δ ′ has an invariant torus,
where the ﬁeld u is ergodic, and an elliptic periodic trajectory. Furthermore, they
are respectively given by ∂Ψ i[Tǫ(γi)] and ˜Ψ i(γi), where Ψ i, ˜Ψ i areCm-small diﬀeo-
morphisms of R3 with Ψ i − id and ˜Ψ i − id supported in small neighborhoods Ui, ˜Ui
of ∂Tǫ(γi) and γi, in each case. We can assume that the complement
R3\(Ω 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ω N )
is connected and that the sets Ω i are pairwise disjoint.
Let us deﬁne a vector ﬁeld v in Ω 1 ∪ · · · ∪ Ω N by setting it equal to the local
Beltrami ﬁeld vi in each set Ω i. By Theorem 8.3, there is a Beltrami ﬁeld u, which
satisﬁes the equation
curlu =ǫ3u
in R3, that falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as |Dju(x)|<C j/|x| and approximates the ﬁeld v as
‖u −v‖C k(Ω 1∪···∪Ω N ) <δ ′.
Therefore, if we deﬁne the diﬀeomorphism Φ of R3 as
Φ(x) :=





Ψ i(x) if x ∈Ui,
˜Ψ i(x) if x ∈ ˜Ui,
x otherwise,
it follows that, for each i, Φ[ Tǫ(γi)] is a vortex tube of the Beltrami ﬁeld u, and that
Φ(γi) is an elliptic periodic trajectory. Besides, the Beltrami ﬁeld u is ergodic (and
orbitally conjugate to a Diophantine rotation) on each invariant tor us ∂Φ[ Tǫ(γi)].EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 59
The ﬁeld u being orbitally conjugate to a Diophantine rotation on each invariant
torus∂Φ[ Tǫ(γi)], it follows [14] that this invariant torus is accumulated by a Cantor-
like set of invariant tori with positive Lebesgue measure. On these in variant tori,
the ﬁeld is also orbitally conjugate to Diophantine rotations. The cor responding set
of Diophantine frequencies is Cantor-like because the normal tors ion NΠ is nonzero.
Therefore, if we consider the trajectories of the ﬁeld u between two of these invariant
tori (lying on the same vortex tube Φ[ Tǫ(γi)]), Angenent’s dichotomy [1] asserts that
either there is a horseshoe-type invariant set between them or th ere are invariant
tori where the ﬁeld is conjugate to a rotation of rational frequen cy. In both cases,
there are inﬁnitely many periodic trajectories between these tori. The theorem
then follows.
Remark 9.1. It is worth giving some additional details about what we understand
by a thin tube. What we have proved is that for any set of smooth pe riodic curves
γ1,...,γ N , δ > 0 and m ∈ N, there is a positive constant ǫ0, depending on δ, m
and the geometry of the curves, such that the statement of The orem 1.1 holds true
for any thickness ǫ < ǫ0, the diﬀeomorphism Φ that maps the tubes Tǫ(γi) into
vortex tubes being bounded by ‖Φ − id‖C m(R3) <δ . It should be noticed that both
Theorem 1.1 and its proof hold verbatim if one takes tubes Tǫ1 (γ1),..., TǫN (γN ) of
diﬀerent thickness, as long as ǫ1,...,ǫ N are small enough (that is, smaller than the
above constant ǫ0).
Remark 9.2. Contrary to what happened in the main theorem of [11], the proof
of Theorem 1.1 does not work in general (even if we drop the require ment that
the ﬁeld u decays at inﬁnity, replacing Theorem 8.3 by [11, Theorem 3.6]) if we
substitute the ﬁnite set of curves {γi}N
i=1 by an inﬁnite set {γi}∞
i=1 that is locally
ﬁnite. The reason is that the “maximal thickness” ǫ0(γi) associated to each curve γi
individually does not need to be bounded away from zero: since all the vector
ﬁelds vi, deﬁned in a neighborhood of the tube
Tǫi(γi) (whose thickness can vary
from tube to tube), must satisfy the Beltrami equation
curlvi =λvi
with the same constantλ for all i. Since this λ must be of order O[ǫ0(γi)3] for all i,
it is clear that the construction breaks down if the inﬁmum of the pos itive quantities
{ǫ0(γi)}∞
i=1 is 0. On the other hand, if this inﬁmum is positive, we can apply the
approximation theorem in [11, Theorem 3.6] to construct a global Be ltrami ﬁeld
with all the properties listed in the statement of Theorem 1.1 with the exception
that its growth at inﬁnity is not controlled.
10. A comment about the Navier–Stokes equation
To conclude, we will present an easy application of Theorem 1.1 to the existence
of (time-dependent) solutions to the Navier–Stokes equation tha t have a prescribed
set of stationary (possibly knotted and linked) vortex tubes.
For this, let us take the global Beltrami ﬁeld u that we considered in Section 9.
That is, u satisﬁes the equation
curlu =ǫ3u
in R3, falls oﬀ at inﬁnity as C/|x| and has a set of thin invariant tubes given by
{Φ[ Tǫ(γi)]}N
i=1, where the diﬀeomorphism Φ is close to the identity and ǫ is a small60 ALBERTO ENCISO AND DANIEL PERALTA-SALAS
constant. Then the analytic time-dependent ﬁeld
w(x,t ) := u(x) e−νǫ6t
is a solution of the Navier–Stokes equation
∂tw + (w · ∇)w =ν∆ w − ∇P , divw = 0
in R3 with pressure P (x,t ) = c − 1
2 |w(x,t )|2. As the vortex lines of w (which are
the trajectories of the vorticity curl w(x,t ) for ﬁxed t) coincide with those of u at all
times, up to a reparametrization, it follows that w is a solution to the Navier–Stokes
equation with the desired properties.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part by the Spanish MINECO under grants F IS2011-
22566 (A.E.) and the ICMAT Severo Ochoa grant SEV-2011-0087 (A.E. and D.P.S.).
The authors are respectively supported by the Ram´ on y Cajal pr ogram (A.E.) and
an ERC starting grant 335079 (D.P.S.).
References
[1] S.B. Angenent, The topological entropy and invariant ci rcles of an area preserving twist map,
in: Twist mappings and their applications , Springer, New York, 1992.
[2] V.I. Arnold, Sur la g´ eom´ etrie diﬀ´ erentielle des grou pes de Lie de dimension inﬁnie et ses
applications ` a l’hydrodynamique des ﬂuides parfaits, Ann . Inst. Fourier 16 (1966) 319–361.
[3] V.I. Arnold, The asymptotic Hopf invariant and its appli cations, Sel. Math. Sov. 5 (1986)
327–345.
[4] V.I. Arnold, B. Khesin, Topological methods in hydrodynamics , Springer, New York, 1999.
[5] J.W. Bruce, P.J. Giblin, Curves and singularities , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1984.
[6] A. Choﬀrut, V. Sverak, Local structure of the set of stead y-state solutions to the 2D incom-
pressible Euler equations, Geom. Funct. Anal. 22 (2012) 136 –201.
[7] D. C´ ordoba, C. Feﬀerman, On the collapse of tubes carrie d by 3D incompressible ﬂows,
Comm. Math. Phys. 222 (2001) 293–298.
[8] R. de la Llave, A. Gonz´ alez, Analytic smoothing of geome tric maps with applications to KAM
theory, J. Diﬀerential Equations 245 (2008) 1243–1298.
[9] J. Deng, T.Y. Hou, X. Yu, Geometric properties and nonblo wup of 3D incompressible Euler
ﬂow. Comm. PDE 30 (2005) 225–243.
[10] D.G. Ebin, J. Marsden, Groups of diﬀeomorphisms and the motion of an incompressible ﬂuid,
Ann. of Math. 92 (1970) 102–163.
[11] A. Enciso, D. Peralta-Salas, Knots and links in steady s olutions of the Euler equation, Ann.
of Math. 175 (2012) 345–367.
[12] J.B. Etnyre, R.W. Ghrist, Stratiﬁed integrals and unkn ots in inviscid ﬂows, Contemp. Math.
246 (1999) 99–111.
[13] J. Etnyre, R. Ghrist, Contact topology and hydrodynami cs III. Knotted orbits, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 352 (2000) 5781–5794.
[14] B. Fayad, R. Krikorian, Herman’s last geometric theore m, Ann. Sci. ´Ec. Norm. Sup´ er. 42
(2009) 193–219.
[15] C. Foias, R. Temam, Remarques sur les ´ equations de Navi er–Stokes stationnaires et les
ph´ enom` enes successifs de bifurcation, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa 5 (1978) 28–63.
[16] M.H. Freedman, Z.X. He, Divergence-free ﬁelds: energy and asymptotic crossing number,
Ann. of Math. 134 (1991) 189–229.
[17] J.M. Gambaudo, E. Ghys, Signature asymptotique d’un ch amp de vecteurs en dimension 3,
Duke Math. J. 106 (2001) 41–79.
[18] M.R. Herman, Existence et non existence de tores invari ants par des diﬀ´ eomorphismes sym-
plectiques, S´ eminaire EDP,´Ecole Polytech., Palaiseau, 1988, pp. 1–24.EXISTENCE OF KNOTTED VORTEX TUBES IN STEADY EULER FLOWS 61
[19] B. Khesin, G. Misiolek, Euler equations on homogeneous spaces and Virasoro orbits, Adv.
Math. 176 (2003) 116–144.
[20] D. Kleckner, W.T.M. Irvine, Creation and dynamics of kn otted vortices, Nature Phys. 9
(2013) 253–258.
[21] P. Laurence, E.W. Stredulinsky, Two-dimensional magn etohydrodynamic equilibria with pre-
scribed topology, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 53 (2000) 1177–120 0.
[22] W.S. Massey, On the normal bundle of a sphere imbedded in Euclidean space, Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc. 10 (1959) 959–964.
[23] H.K. Moﬀatt, Vortex- and magneto-dynamics—a topologi cal perspective, in: Mathematical
physics 2000 , Imperial College Press, London, 2000, pp. 170–182.
[24] C.B. Morrey, On the analyticity of the solutions of anal ytic non-linear elliptic systems of
partial diﬀerential equations. II. Analyticity at the boun dary, Amer. J. Math. 80 (1958) 219–
237.
[25] N. Nadirashvili, On stationary solutions of two-dimen sional Euler equation, Arch. Rat. Mech.
Anal. 209 (2013) 729–745.
[26] R.B. Pelz, Symmetry and the hydrodynamic blow-up probl em, J. Fluid Mech. 444 (2001)
299–320.
[27] R.L. Ricca, New developments in topological ﬂuid mecha nics: from Kelvin’s vortex knots to
magnetic knots, in: Ideal knots , W orld Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, 1998, pp. 255–273.
[28] W. Thomson (Lord Kelvin), Vortex Statics, Proc. R. Soc. Edinburgh 9 (1875) 59–73 (reprinted
in: Mathematical and physical papers IV , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011, pp.
115–128).
[29] T. Vogel, On the asymptotic linking number, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 131 (2003) 2289–2297.
[30] J.-C. Yoccoz, Analytic linearization of circle diﬀeom orphisms, Lect. Notes Math. 1784 (2002)
125–173.
[31] Z. Yoshida, Y. Giga, Remarks on spectra of operator rot, Math. Z. 204 (1990) 235–245.
Instituto de Ciencias Matem ´aticas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cient ´ıficas,
28049 Madrid, Spain
E-mail address : aenciso@icmat.es, dperalta@icmat.es