Graphical Abstract
Soft, slender and active structures in fluids: embedding Cosserat rods in vortex methods
Arman Tekinalp, Yashraj Bhosale, Songyuan Cui, Fan Kiat Chan, Mattia Gazzola,
arXiv:2401.09506v1  [physics.comp-ph]  17 Jan 2024Highlights
Soft, slender and active structures in fluids: embedding Cosserat rods in vortex methods
Arman Tekinalp, Yashraj Bhosale, Songyuan Cui, Fan Kiat Chan, Mattia Gazzola,
• Framework for simulating heterogeneous structures made of slender elastic bodies and immersed in viscous flows.
• Two-way coupling between Cosserat rod theory (slender elastic bodies) and vortex methods (incompressible viscous flows).
• Rigorous validation and convergence analysis against a battery of experimental and computational benchmarks.
• Inclusion of a wide range of multi-physics demonstrations from muscular actuation and bio-locomotion to viscous streaming
and magnetism.
• Scalability enabled via distributed computing for simulating large-scale problems requiring fine spatial resolutions.Soft, slender and active structures in fluids: embedding Cosserat rods in vortex methods
Arman Tekinalpa,1, Yashraj Bhosalea,1, Songyuan Cuia, Fan Kiat Chana, Mattia Gazzolaa,b,c,∗,
aMechanical Sciences and Engineering, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
bCarl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
cNational Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Abstract
We present a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian method for the direct simulation of three-dimensional, heterogeneous structures made
of soft fibers and immersed in incompressible viscous fluids. Fiber-based organization of matter is pervasive in nature and engi-
neering, from biological architectures made of cilia, hair, muscles or bones to polymers, composite materials or soft robots. In
nature, many such structures are adapted to manipulate flows for feeding, locomotion or energy harvesting, through mechanisms
that are often not fully understood. While simulations can support the analysis (and subsequent translational engineering) of these
systems, extreme fibers’ aspect-ratios, large elastic deformations and two-way coupling with three-dimensional flows, all render
the problem numerically challenging. To address this, we couple Cosserat rod theory, which exploits fibers’ slenderness to cap-
ture their dynamics in one-dimensional, accurate fashion, with vortex methods via a penalty immersed boundary technique. The
favorable properties of the resultant hydroelastic solver are demonstrated against a battery of benchmarks, and further showcased
in a range of multi-physics scenarios, involving magnetic actuation, viscous streaming, biomechanics, multi-body interaction, and
self-propulsion.
Keywords: vortex methods, immersed boundary method, Cosserat rods, soft body, magnetism, self-propulsion, soft robotics,
multiphysics, flow–structure interaction, distributed computing
1. Introduction
This paper presents a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian formulation that captures the two-way coupling between multiple heteroge-
neous, elastic, slender bodies and incompressible viscous fluids. Soft slender structures are ubiquitous and pervasive in natural and
artificial systems, in active and passive settings, and across scales, from muscles, tendons and bones that make up full organisms
[1, 2, 3], to polymers, textiles [4, 5, 6, 7], metamaterials [8, 9, 10] and soft robots [2, 11]. In nature, the interaction between these
structures and flow gives rise to a wide array of complex phenomena, ranging from ciliated organisms’ feeding strategies [12],
cephalopods’ stereotypical reaching and grasping motions [13, 14, 3], hagfish’s predatory behavior and body knotting [15], aquatic
animals’ locomotion [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24], to the interplay between marine vegetation growth and ocean currents [25].
Simulating and analyzing these systems can be valuable to understanding and /or engineering them. However, the presence of ex-
treme aspect ratios in these systems, along with di fficulties associated with large elastic deformations and three-dimensional flow
coupling, gives rise to significant numerical challenges.
To address these challenges, here we combine Cosserat rod theory and vortex methods. V ortex methods [26, 27], a class of
techniques used to resolve flow-structure interaction, solve the velocity-vorticity formulation of momentum equations (as opposed
to the velocity–pressure formulation used in other methods), while discretizing solid and fluid phases in Eulerian, Lagrangian, or
hybrid fashions. These methods entail a number of favorable features: guaranteed convergence, accuracy, use of e fficient Fourier
transforms for solving Poisson equations, compact support of vorticity leading to automatic local ( r-)adaptivity, natural treatment
of far-field boundary conditions, ability to model complex solid morphologies, computational economy and software scalability
rivaling traditional velocity-pressure methods [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 17, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38]. These advantages position
vortex method as a versatile option to capture the dynamics of unsteady, complex bodies [33, 17, 34, 37] across scales [36, 39, 40],
to deal with contact physics [32], multiphase [41] and compressible flows [42, 43], in 2D as well as in 3D [34, 44, 45]. Despite
this versatility, little effort has been made to capitalize on these advantages to resolve two-way coupled dynamics between multiple
heterogeneous elastic bodies and the surrounding viscous fluid.
∗Corresponding author
Email address: mgazzola@illinois.edu (Mattia Gazzola)
1Equal contribution.
Preprint submitted to Journal of Computational Physics January 19, 2024Recently, advancements have been made in this direction [46], by integrating inverse map techniques [47] and vortex method
to capture the interaction between bulk rigid and elastic bodies and the surrounding fluid. Despite demonstrating versatility, accu-
racy, and robustness in several multiphysics scenarios, the simulation of fiber-based systems remains hindered by the high spatial
resolutions required to resolve geometric scales disparities. One possible way to address this challenge is to utilize Cosserat
rod theory [48], which exploits the slenderness of fibers to capture their three-dimensional motions and deformations via a one-
dimensional Lagrangian representation. This representation entails a number of attractive features, namely, accuracy [49], linear
scaling of computational complexity with rod resolution [49], seamless integration of non-linear constitutive models [2, 3] and
external environmental effects such as friction, contact [2, 50], magnetism [51], and hydrodynamic loads [52, 53]. These advan-
tages have resulted in the extensive adoption of elastic rod theory across a wide range of scenarios, including textile manufacturing
[4, 5], plant mechanics [54, 55], artificial muscle modeling [56, 57], musculoskeletal and biological tissue modeling [2, 58, 3, 59],
bio-hybrid machines [2, 60, 11, 61], 3D printing [62, 63], DNA strands [64, 65], meta-materials [66, 67, 9, 10], model-based
[68, 69, 70, 71] and model-free [72, 73] control of soft robots.
Here, the coupling between Cosserat rods and vortex methods is achieved via a mixed Eulerian-Langrangian approach, and
the derived solver’s accuracy, robustness, versatility and scalability is demonstrated through a range of multiphysics scenarios
involving magnetically actuated cilia carpets, viscous streaming, biomechanics, multi-body interaction, and self-propulsion. The
work is organized as follows: governing equations and modeling techniques are described in Section 2 and Section 3, respectively;
proposed algorithm and numerical discretization are detailed in Section 4; rigorous benchmarking and convergence analysis is
presented in Section 5; versatility and robustness of the solver is illustrated through a variety of multifaceted cases in Section 6;
finally, concluding remarks are provided in Section 7.
2. Governing equations
Here, we provide a description of the governing equations and constitutive laws that dictate the dynamics of multiple rigid
bodies and elastic slender structures within a viscous fluid.
2.1. Governing equations for solids and fluids
We start by considering a three-dimensional domain Σ that encompasses an incompressible viscous fluid, as well as rigid and
elastic bodies. As a convention, the subscripts f , r and e refer to the fluid, rigid body and the elastic body phases, respectively.
We use the notations Ωe,i and∂Ωe,i (where i = 1,..., Ne) to represent the support and boundaries of the elastic solids, and Ωr, j and
∂Ωr, j (where j = 1,..., Nr) for the rigid solids. By defining Ω = Ωe,i∪ Ωr, j as the region occupied by solid material, the remaining
region Σ− Ω is occupied by the fluid. The balance of linear and angular momentum in the fluid domain (for infinitesimal Eulerian
volumes dx) leads to the incompressible Navier–Stokes equations
∇· v f = 0; ∂v f
∂t +

v f· ∇

v f =− 1
ρ f
∇p f +ν f ∇2v f + f f, x∈ Σ− Ω (1)
where t∈ R+ represents time, v f : Σ× R+7→ R3 represents the velocity field, ρ f denotes the fluid density, ν f denotes the fluid’s
kinematic viscosity, p f : Σ×R+7→ R represents the hydrostatic pressure field and f f : Σ×R+7→ R3 represents the body force field.
The body force field f f can be further decomposed into two parts f f = f f,v + f f,∂Ω, where f f,v is a conservative volumetric force
(like gravitational acceleration), and f f,∂Ω is a coupling force used to impose the no-slip condition on the fluid-structure boundary
∂Ω, as described in Section 3.2. We make the assumption that all the aforementioned fields are sufficiently smooth both in time and
space. The interaction between the fluid and elastic solid phases occurs solely through boundary conditions, which enforce velocity
continuity (no-slip) and traction forces at all interfaces between the fluid and elastic solid.
v = v f = ve,i, σ f· n =σe,i· n, x∈∂Ωe,i (2)
where n denotes the unit outward normal vector at the interface ∂Ωe,i. The interfacial velocities in the fluid and ith elastic body
are represented by v f and ve,i respectively. Similarly, the interfacial Cauchy stress tensors in the fluid and ith elastic body are
denoted asσ f andσe,i respectively. Within the regionsΩr, j occupied by rigid solids (j = 1,..., Nr), the velocities are kinematically
constrained to rigid body modes of pure translation and rotation. Consequently, the interaction between the rigid bodies and the
fluid domain is mediated only by the no-slip boundary condition
v = v f = vr, j = vcmr, j|{z}
translation
+ωr, j× (x− xcmr, j)|                {z                }
rotation
, x∈∂Ωr, j (3)
where vr, j is the rigid body velocity field, xcmr, j is the center of mass (COM) position, vcmr, j is the center of mass velocity, andωr, j
is the angular velocity about the COM of the jth rigid body.
22.2. Cosserat rod model for soft, slender heterogeneous structures
To close the above set of equations (Eqs. 1 to 3), it is necessary to specify the governing equations and constitutive laws of the
elastic structures. Resolving the dynamics of slender, fiber-like bodies via 3D bulk elasticity frameworks is particularly cumbersome
and expensive, given their aspect ratios. We thus adopt the use of Cosserat rod theory.
Cosserat rod theory captures three-dimensional motions and deformations of slender elastic structures via a one-dimensional
Lagrangian representation. Figure 1a presents the setup of the Cosserat rod theory model. Each point on the Cosserat rod is
characterized by a center-line x(s, t)∈ R3 and an orthonormal frame Q(s, t)∈ R3×3 ={d1, d2, d3} (triad of unit vectors di∈ R3),
which defines the frame transformations between the laboratory and local frames. Here, s∈ [0, L(t)] is the center-line arc-length
coordinate, where L is the rod’s current length, and t is the time. Any vector v ∈ R3 defined in the laboratory frame can be
transformed into its local frame counterpart ¯v∈ R3, by ¯v = Qv and from local to laboratory frame by v = QT ¯v. For an unshearable
and inextensible rod, d3 is parallel to the rod tangent xs∈ R3 =∂sx, with d1 (normal) and d2 (binormal) spanning the cross-section
of the rod. Under shear and extension, the rod tangent xs and d3 are no longer parallel and their shift can be quantified via the shear
vector ¯σ∈ R3 = Q (xs− d3) in the local frame. The curvature vector κ(s, t)∈ R3 encodes Q’s rotations along the rod through the
relation∂sd j =κ× d j. The rate of change of Q is given by∂t d j =ω× d j, whereω∈ R3 corresponds to the angular velocity. After
Figure 1: (a) Cosserat rod model. A soft filament (blue) deforming in three-dimensional space is described by a center-line x(s, t), and a local orthonormal frame
Q(s, t) ={d1, d2, d3}, both functions of centerline’s arc-length coordinate s and time t. Orange and purple lines around the elastic rod (blue) trace out d1(s, t) and
−d1(s, t), respectively. The shear vector ¯σ(s, t) is quantified by the deviation of d3(s, t) from xs(s, t). External force and couple densities are denoted by f(s, t) and
c(s, t), respectively. (b) Penalty immersed boundary (pIBM) setup. An elastic body/rod (orange region) defined on a Lagrangian domainΩ is immersed in a viscous
fluid represented on a fixed Eulerian domainΣ. The elastic rod/body is discretized into Lagrangian elements along the centerline, separated by nodesxcm(s, t) on the
same centerline. An immersed boundary∂Ω body-fitted to the elastic body and discretized via forcing points (pink circles), runs parallel to the Lagrangian elements
with x∂Ω := r∂Ω + xcm, where r∂Ω is the moment arm of the forcing points. The green area∂Γ refers to the boundary or interface that separates a Lagrangian element
from the viscous fluid that surrounds it.
defining the velocity of the centerline v∈ R3 =∂t x, second area moment of inertia ¯I∈ R3×3, cross-sectional area A, and densityρ,
the dynamics [74] of a soft slender body is described by
∂2
t (ρAx) =∂s

QT ¯n

+ f (4)
∂t

ρ ¯I ¯ω

=∂s ¯τ + ¯κ× ¯τ + (Qxs× ¯n) +

ρ ¯I ¯ω

× ¯ω + Qc (5)
where Eqs. 4 and 5 represent linear and angular momentum balance at every cross section, ¯n and ¯τ are the internal forces and
torques, f and c are the external force and torque densities, respectively. To close the above Eqs. 4 and 5, it is necessary to specify
the form of the internal forces ( ¯n) and torques ( ¯τ) generated in response to shear ( ¯σ) and bend/twist (¯κ) strains. In this study, for
simplicity, we assume a perfectly elastic material so that the stress–strain relations are linear. We note that Cosserat rod theory
is not limited to modeling linear elasticity, but can be extended to non-linear elastic materials [2, 3]. Within the linear elasticity
model, the internal forces ¯n can be expressed as
¯n = ¯S ( ¯σ− ¯σ0) (6)
where ¯σ0 is the intrinsic shear strain and ¯S∈ R3×3 = diag
 ¯S 1, ¯S 2, ¯S 3

= diag (αcGA,α cGA, EA) is the shear/stretch stiffness matrix.
Here, ¯S 1, ¯S 2 and ¯S 3 are the shear/stretch rigidities about d1, d2 and d3, respectively. Additionally, E, G andαc correspond to the
Young’s modulus, the shear modulus, and the shear correction factor, respectively (for details, see [74]). Similarly, the internal
torques ¯τ can be expressed as
¯τ = ¯B (¯κ− ¯κ0) (7)
3where ¯κ0 is the intrinsic rod curvature and ¯B∈ R3×3 = diag
 ¯B1, ¯B2, ¯B3

= diag

E ¯I1, E ¯I2, G ¯I3

is the bend/twist stiffness matrix.
Here, ¯B1, ¯B2 and ¯B3 are the bend /twist rigidities about d1, d2 and d3, respectively. Additionally, ¯I1, ¯I2 and ¯I3 correspond to the
values of second moment of inertia about d1, d2 and d3, respectively.
The Cosserat rod representation presented above enables a number of favorable features: (1) it captures 3D dynamic e ffects
and all modes of deformation (bending, twist, shear, stretch), particularly relevant in the case of biological or elastomeric materials
[74, 3, 55]; (2) non-linear constitutive models can be seamlessly integrated via Eqs. 6 and 7 [2, 3, 55]; (3) complexity scales as
O(n) with axial resolution [74]; (4) kinematic or dynamic boundary conditions can be directly enforced, allowing the assembly of
multiple rods into complex architectures [2, 3]; (5) continuum and/or distributed actuation and environmental loads can be directly
incorporated via f and c into the Cosserat rod dynamics, rendering the inclusion of contact dynamics [9, 10], friction [9, 10],
muscular activity [2, 3], magnetism [75] or hydrodynamics [52, 53] straightforward.
3. Methodology
Having established the fundamental governing equations and boundary conditions, we will now introduce the methodologies
employed for solving these coupled equations. We employ the Cosserat rod equations to track the dynamics and deformations of
elastic slender bodies, and the immersed boundary method to solve the coupling problem in a hybrid Eulerian /Lagrangian vortex
method framework.
3.1. Vortex methods
V ortex methods consider the vorticity form of the Navier–Stokes equations, obtained by taking the curl of Eq. 1
∂ω f
∂t +

v f· ∇

ω f−

ω f· ∇

v f =ν f ∇2ω f + ∇× f f, (8)
whereω f : Σ× R+7→ R3 :=∇× v f represents the vorticity field in the fluid. With pressure p eliminated from the governing equa-
tions, an incompressible velocity field is then directly recovered from the vorticity by solving a Poisson equation using appropriate
boundary conditions on Σ
∇2ψ f =−ω f ; v f = ∇×ψ f (9)
where ψ f : Σ× R+ 7→ R3 (in 2D ψ f corresponds to the streamfunction). Favorable features of this approach are: guaranteed
convergence, accuracy, use of efficient Fourier transforms for solving Poisson equations, compact support of vorticity leading to
automatic local ( r-)adaptivity, natural treatment of far field boundary conditions, ability to model complex solid morphologies,
computational economy and software scalability [26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 17, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38].
3.2. Immersed boundary method
We connect the forcing terms f from the Navier–Stokes equations (Eq. 8) and the Cosserat rod equations (Eqs. 4 and 5) via
the immersed boundary method. Immersed boundary methods (IBMs) are widely adopted computational techniques for simulating
fluid-structure interaction problems involving complex geometries [76, 77]. In IBMs, the fluid domain is typically discretized using
an Eulerian grid, while the immersed object is represented on a Lagrangian grid that can move freely with respect to the underlying
Eulerian fluid mesh. The interaction between the fluid and solid phases is modeled using a force distribution function, applied
on the Lagrangian and Eulerian grids, to achieve two-way fluid-structure interactions. Due to their versatility, IBMs have been
employed in a range applications, from microfluidics [78, 79] and biomedical engineering [80, 76] to the aerospace industry [81].
In this study, we adopt the penalty immersed boundary method (pIBM), a flavor of IBMs that adds penalty forces to the
governing equations of both fluid and solid phases, to enforce appropriate boundary conditions (Eqs. 2 and 3) at the fluid-solid
interface [82, 83]. Figure 1b presents the setup of the penalty immersed boundary method—an elastic body ( Ω) fitted with an
immersed boundary at the fluid-solid interface (∂Ω) is submerged in a viscous fluid Σ. The steps involved in the pIBM formulation
for the two-way coupling can be briefly summarized as follows: (1) interpolate the flow velocity v f from the Eulerian grid (Σ) and
the body velocity vi from the Lagrangian domain (Ω) onto the immersed boundary (∂Ω); (2) compute the coupling force between
the two phases based on the deviation between the interpolated velocities; (3) transfer the coupling forces via the forcing terms f
to the fluid (Σ) and the solid (Ω) domains, respectively.
We next present a detailed step-by-step implementation of the pIBM formulation. We begin by computing the velocity of the
fluid phase on the Lagrangian boundary∂Ω at position x∂Ω, via interpolation
v f,∂Ω =
Z
Σ
v f (x)δ (x∂Ω− x) dx (10)
4where v f (x), v f,∂Ω correspond to the fluid velocity at the Eulerian position x and on the immersed boundary (∂Ω), and δ(·) is the
Dirac delta function. Simultaneously, we compute the velocity of the ith body on∂Ω (vi,∂Ω) as
vi,∂Ω = vi,cm +ωi,cm× ri,∂Ω (11)
where vi,cm,ωi,cm, and ri,∂Ω represent the translational and rotational velocity of the center of mass (COM), and the moment arm
of the immersed boundary from COM, respectively. With the velocities of both the phases on∂Ω known, the interaction force f∂Ω
between the fluid and the ith body is then computed as
f∂Ω =−
Z t
0
α

vi,∂Ω− v f,∂Ω

dt−β

vi,∂Ω− v f,∂Ω

(12)
where α and β are the coupling sti ffness constant and the coupling damping constant, respectively. To enforce the fluid-solid
interfacial conditions (Eqs. 2 and 3) accurately, we require α≫ 1 (although too large values often lead to numerical instabilities
[82]). Typically,α =O(104) andβ =O(10) are observed to strike a balance between accuracy and stability [84, 85]. The final step
in the pIBM formulation involves transferring equal and opposite coupling forces to the fluid and solid phases. The coupling force
on the fluid f f,∂Ω at the Eulerian position x is computed as
f f,∂Ω(x) =−
Z
∂Ω
f∂Ω(x∂Ω)δ (x− x∂Ω) dx∂Ω. (13)
Before computing the coupling forces on the elastic body, note that the elastic rod /body is discretized into Lagrangian elements
along the centerline (green zone, Fig. 1b), defined by the nodes xcm(s, t) on the same centerline. Then the coupling forces f i,∂Ω and
torques ci,∂Ω acting on a single Lagrangian element of the ith body Ωi are computed as
f i,∂Ω =
Z
∂Γ
f∂Ω dx∂Ω ci,∂Ω =
Z
∂Γ
 ri,∂Ω× f∂Ω
 dx∂Ω (14)
where ∂Γ refers to the fluid-solid interface of the Lagrangian element. The pIBM formulation presented above is (1) relatively
easy to implement and can be integrated into existing numerical codes [86]; (2) decouples the representation of the fluid and
solid phases, simplifying mesh generation (no conforming meshes [87]); (3) reduces computational cost by avoiding remeshing
in the case of moving boundaries [77]; (4) enables e fficiency and parallelization performance typical of structured grids [85];
(5) accommodates different phase representations (fluid or solid), enabling relatively straightforward integration of independently
developed methodologies for fluid, solid, or other multi-physics components [88, 89].
In the next section, we proceed to describe the numerical discretization of the elements described above, with a detailed step-
by-step explanation of our algorithm.
4. Numerical discretization and algorithm
We begin by spatially discretizing the system of equations for the fluid phase (Eqs. 8 and 9) via an Eulerian Cartesian grid
of uniform spacing h to create our computational domain Σh. The continuous flow fields previously defined are now replaced
with their discrete counterparts on Σh. For the elastic fibers, the Cosserat rod equations (Eqs. 4 and 5) are discretized over a
Lagrangian grid, consisting of discrete elements along the centerline with uniform spacing ds. Finally, the fluid-solid interfaces
(immersed boundaries) are discretized using Lagrangian grids ∂Ωh body-fitted to the solid domain Ωh, with uniform grid spacing
h∂Ω. The spacing between Lagrangian grid pointsh∂Ω is calculated based on the spacing of Eulerian grid pointsh, ensuring that each
Lagrangian point spans across 1-2 neighboring Eulerian points. The implementation of a relative grid spacing policy guarantees
the synchronized convergence of fluid-solid dynamics, while also preventing artificial gaps between the two interfaces.
Next, we outline Algorithm 1 which describes one complete time step, spanning from tn to tn+1, assuming that all relevant
quantities are already known up to time tn.
4.1. Poisson solve and velocity recovery
First, we solve the Poisson equation (Eq. 15) for the variable ψ. Depending on the problem setup, we employ periodic or
unbounded boundary conditions. To solve Eq. 15 on the grid, we use a Fourier-series based solver that operates with O n log(n)
complexity. This solver takes advantage of the diagonal nature of the Poisson operator in the case of periodic boundaries [90],
allowing for spectral accuracy. For unbounded conditions, we utilize the zero padding technique described by Hockney and East-
wood [90]. Once ψ is obtained on the grid, we calculate the velocity according to Eq. 16 using the discrete second-order centered
finite difference curl operator.
5Algorithm 1 General algorithm
Poisson solve (Section 4.1) ∇2ψn
f =−ωn
f (15)
Velocity recovery (Section 4.1) vn
f = ∇×ψn
f + Vn
f,∞ (16)
Compute flow velocity on fluid-solid interface (Section 4.2) vn
f,∂Ω =
Z
Σ
vn
f (x)δ

xn
∂Ω− x

dx (17)
Compute body velocity on fluid-solid interface (Section 4.2) vn
i,∂Ω = vn
i,cm +ωn
i,cm× rn
i,∂Ω (18)
Compute coupling force on fluid-solid interface (Section 4.2) f n
∂Ω =−
Z tn
0
α

vn
i,∂Ω− vn
f,∂Ω

dt−β

vn
i,∂Ω− vn
f,∂Ω

(19)
Transfer coupling force to fluid (Section 4.2) f n
f,∂Ω(x) =−
Z
∂Ω
f n
∂Ω(xn
∂Ω)δ

x− xn
∂Ω

dx∂Ω (20)
Transfer coupling force to body (Section 4.2) f n
i,∂Ω =
Z
∂Γ
f n
∂Ω dx∂Ω; cn
i,∂Ω =
Z
∂Γ

rn
i,∂Ω× f n
∂Ω

dx∂Ω (21)
Fluid (vorticity) update (Section 4.3)
∂ωn
f
∂t +

vn
f· ∇

ωn
f−

ωn
f· ∇

vn
f = ∇×

f n
f,v + f n
f,∂Ω

+ν f ∇2ωn
f
(22)
V orticity propagation to next time step (Section 4.3) ωn+1
f =ωn
f (23)
Elastic body update (Section 4.4) xn
e,i, vn
e,i, Qn
e,i, ωn
e,i
f
n
e,i,∂Ω, cn
e,i,∂Ω
− −−−−−−−−−→xn+1
e,i , vn+1
e,i , Qn+1
e,i , ωn+1
e,i (24)
Rigid body update (Section 4.4) xn
cmr, j, vn
cmr, j, Qn
r, j, ωn
r, j
f
n
r, j,∂Ω, cn
r, j,∂Ω
− −−−−−−−−−→xn+1
cmr, j, vn+1
cmr, j, Qn
r, j, ωn+1
r, j (25)
4.2. Immersed boundary computation
For each solid body, the velocity of the fluid phase on the Lagrangian boundary∂Ωh at position x∂Ωh is computed via the discrete
form of Eq. 17, which reads
vn
f,∂Ω =
X
xh∈gh
vn
f (xh)δh

xn
∂Ωh
− xh

hd (26)
where d,δh(·) and gh correspond to the grid dimension (2 for 2D and 3 for 3D), mollified Delta function, and support of the Delta
function, respectively. The mollified Delta functionδh(·) reads
δh(x) = 1
hd
dY
i=1
W
 xi
h

(27)
where i symbolizes the grid index and W(·) is an interpolation kernel. In this study, W(·) is the four point Delta function introduced
by Peskin [91] and widely used in IBM studies. Following interpolation, the velocity of the solid body is then computed on
the Lagrangian boundary ∂Ωh via Eq. 18. With the velocities of both the phases on ∂Ωh known, the interaction force f∂Ωh is
then computed via Eq. 19, with the time integral on the RHS of Eq. 19 computed discretely via a left Riemann sum. Following
interaction force computations (Eq. 19), the coupling forces are transferred to the fluid phase via the discrete form of Eq. 20
f f,∂Ωh(xh) =−
X
x∂Ωh∈gh
f∂Ωh(x∂Ωh)δh
 xh− x∂Ωh
 hd−1
∂Ω (28)
Simultaneously, equal and opposite forces and corresponding torques are transferred to the ith body Ωi via the discrete version of
Eq. 21
f i,∂Ωh =
X
∂Γh
f∂Ωhhd−1
∂Ω ci,∂Ωh =
X
∂Γh

ri,∂Ωh× f∂Ωh

hd−1
∂Ω (29)
4.3. Fluid phase (vorticity) update
After the transfer of the coupling forces to the fluid (Eq. 20), we next update the fluid state (vorticity) via Eq. 22. The numerics
of this step entails computing three main components that modify the vorticity, namely, the body forces ∇×

f n
f,v + f n
f,∂Ω

, the
diffusion flux ν f ∇2ωn
f and the flow inertia flux, that includes the advection

vn
f· ∇

ωn
f and stretching

ωn
f· ∇

vn
f terms. For the
6body forcing and di ffusion flux terms, we compute ∇×

f n
f,v + f n
f,∂Ω

and ν f ∇2ωn
f by replacing the curl operator ∇× and the
Laplacian operator ∇2 with their discrete second-order centered finite difference counterparts.
For the flow inertia terms, we use slightly di fferent formulations in two-dimensional and three-dimensional settings, for the
following reasons. In 2D flows, where the vortex stretching term

ωn
f· ∇

vn
f identically vanishes, the flow inertia term reduces to
the advection term

vn
f· ∇

ωn
f , which is discretized using an ENO3 stencil [92]. However, in 3D flows where the vortex stretching
term is typically non-vanishing, the same approach cannot be applied in a numerically stable fashion. The rationale behind this is
that since the vorticityω f is defined as the curl of a smooth differentiable velocity field v f (ω f = ∇× v f ), theoretically it needs to
satisfy the zero divergence constraint (∇·ω f = 0). While this is trivially satisfied in 2D, in 3D the numerical errors resulting from
the advection and stretching terms create spurious divergence in the vorticity field, leading to long-time numerical instabilities. To
mitigate this issue, based on insights from pseudospectral methods [93], we solve Eq. 22 via two back-to-back steps
∂ωn
f
∂t + ∇×

ωn
f× vn
f

= ∇×

f n
f,v + f n
f,∂Ω

+ν f ∇2ωn
f (30)
ωn
f = Lp(ωn
f ) (31)
where the first step (Eq. 30) involves reformulating the flow inertia terms into a rotational form∇×

ωn
f× vn
f

(curl of a vector field).
The second step (Eq. 31), similar to dealiasing in pseudospectral methods, corresponds to applying a compact discrete (only using
neighbouring grid values) filter Lp(·) on the vorticity outputted from Eq. 30. The superscript p, taking integer values, corresponds
to the filter order and qualitatively maps to the strength of the filter; lower values of p imply stronger filtering action. We set p = 5
for all 3D simulations to avoid artificial dampening of vorticity while preserving stability of our simulations. Additional details on
the numerical implementation and transfer function of the compact discrete filters can be found in Jeanmart and Winckelmans [94].
Following the evaluation of all forcing terms in Eq. 22, we then perform temporal integration using a forward Euler timestep.
The vorticity after this step is then carried over to the next timestep (Eq. 23).
4.4. Elastic and rigid body update
In Eq. 24 we resolve the elastic rod dynamics. We discretize the Cosserat rod equations (Eqs. 4 and 5) on a Lagrangian grid of
uniform spacing ds along the centerline (thus forming a set of discrete cylindrical elements of length ds). For terms on the right-
hand side of Eqs. 4 and 5 involving spatial di fferentiation along the centerline, we use second-order centered finite di fferences to
compute the derivatives. Finally, with the internal and external, forces and torques known, we evolve the kinematic state (positions,
orientations and velocities) of all the elastic rods (Eq. 24) using the symplectic, second-order position Verlet time integration
scheme. Similarly, rigid bodies are updated in Eq. 25. Numerical details and validation of the Cosserat rod dynamics solver can be
found in [49], while the implementation can be found in the open-source software PyElastica [95].
4.5. Restrictions on simulation time step
In our algorithm, we face three main restrictions on the time step size due to the existence of distinct time scales in the coupling
problem. The first restriction is a typical CFL (Courant–Friedrich–Lewy) condition, that stems from the advection and stretching
of vorticity inside the fluid
∆t1≤ h CFL||v f||−1
∞ (32)
where v f refers to the velocity field inside the fluid. The second restriction is the Fourier condition that ensures stability with regards
to explicit time discretization of the viscous stresses inside the fluid
∆t2≤ k h2/(2dν f ) (33)
where k is a constant usually set to be ≤ 1. Here we set k = 0.9 throughout. Finally, the third restriction stems from the need to
resolve shear waves inside elastic solids. This is a CFL-like restriction dependent on the shear wave speed csh
∆t3≤ ds CFL c−1
sh = ds CFL
p
ρe/G. (34)
Here, ds, ρe and G correspond to the rod’s Lagrangian grid spacing, solid density and shear modulus, respectively. Combining
Eqs. 32 to 34, we obtain the final criterion to adapt the time step during simulation
∆t = min [∆t1, ∆t2, ∆t3]. (35)
We observe (a posteriori) that in several cases investigated in Section 5 and Section 6, the time-step restriction from the high elastic
shear wave speeds∆t3, rather than the CFL condition∆t1 or the diffusion limit ∆t2, limits the global time-step∆t. Potential solutions
to improve computational efficiency consist in the use of local time stepping techniques [36] or the implicit update of the elastic
body dynamics [96].
After providing a comprehensive explanation of our algorithm, we proceed to assess its accuracy and convergence properties
through rigorous validations against a variety of analytical and numerical benchmarks.
75. Validation benchmarks
The conducted benchmark tests involve flow past a two-dimensional elastic rod under gravity, a two-dimensional elastic rod
flapping in the wake of a rigid cylinder, cross-flow past a three-dimensional elastic rod under gravity, and self-propelled elastic
anguilliform swimming in two and three dimensions. For each case, we conduct a convergence analysis by reporting the discrete
error e (of relevant physical quantities) as a function of the spatial discretization. We define e as e =|(p− pre f)/pre f|, where p is a
physical quantity obtained from our method and pre f is the reference solution.
In different problems, the dynamics involved can be influenced by one or more key dimensionless numbers. Here, we provide
a compilation of these numbers along with their respective physical interpretations
Re := ρ f VL
µ f
∼ inertial forces
viscous forces; Cau := ρ f V2
E ∼ inertial forces
elastic forces ; ρ := ρe
ρ f
∼ body inertia
flow inertia AR := L
D∼ Slenderness (36)
where Re, Cau,ρ, AR, V, L,µ f ,ρ f ,ρe, E, De and Le correspond to the Reynolds number, Cauchy number [97], density ratio, rod’s
aspect ratio, velocity scale, length scale (i.e. the rod length), fluid viscosity, fluid density, elastic rod density, Young’s modulus of
the rod and the rod’s cross-sectional diameter, respectively. Besides the numbers above, another dimensionless quantity has been
conventionally employed to characterize the dynamics of slender body systems [98, 99]. This number, known as the dimensionless
bending stiffness Kb, is defined as
Kb := EI
ρ f V2L3 (2D) or EI
ρ f V2L3D (3D) ∼ bending mode forces
inertial forces (37)
where I corresponds to the second area moment of inertia of the rod’s cross-section about the normal/binormal axis (see Section 2.2).
The slight difference in the definition of Kb in 2D and 3D stems from the difference in units of I, which has units m3 in 2D and m4
in 3D. Lastly, we note that Kb can be expressed as a function of the other non-dimensional parameters mentioned in Eq. 36. For
instance, in the case of an elastic rod in 3D with a cross-sectional diameter D, the moment of intertia scales as I∝ D4, resulting in
the equivalent definition Kb := (CauAR3)−1.
5.1. Flapping of a two-dimensional elastic rod in the wake of a rigid cylinder
We first demonstrate the ability of our solver to capture interactions between multiple elastic/rigid bodies immersed in a viscous
fluid. Accordingly, we reproduce the case of a two-dimensional elastic rod flapping in the wake of a rigid cylinder, characterized in
detail by Turek and Hron [98]. Figure 2a presents the initial physical setup—a fixed rigid cylinder of diameter D is immersed in a
channel of width 4D, with a constant, unbounded, background free stream of velocity V∞ˆi. An elastic rod of length L is initialized
in the same fluid, with its upstream end clamped to the most downstream point of the cylinder. Additional geometric and parametric
details can be found in Fig. 2 caption. We simulate this cylinder–rod system long enough after shedding vortices to eventually reach
a dynamic, periodic state. This state is visualized via the vorticity contours at a particular time instance in Fig. 2b, where the rod is
observed to flap and shed vortices downstream in the channel. We then quantitatively validate our solver by tracking the temporal
variation of the rod tip’s horizontal and vertical displacements and compare it against Turek and Hron [98]. As seen from Fig. 2c,
our results show close agreement with the benchmark [98].
We then present the grid convergence for this case, by tracking the amplitude of the rod tip’s horizontal and vertical oscillations
(Fig. 2c), and computing the error norms with respect to the best resolved case. With CFL = 0.1, we vary the spatial resolution
between 128× 48 and 1024× 384 (with 2048× 768 as the best resolved case). As seen from Fig. 2d, we observe grid convergence
between first and second order (least squares fit of 1.33 and 1.24 for vertical and horizontal displacements, respectively), consistent
with our algorithm. Thus, the results of this section indicate the ability of our approach to successfully capture, in two dimensions,
fluid–elastic solid and fluid–rigid solid interactions that are themselves coupled. For an additional, simpler validation of a single,
two-dimensional elastic structure immersed in fluid, the reader is referred to the Appendix A.
5.2. Cross-flow past a three-dimensional elastic rod under gravity
Post validation in two dimensions. Here, we consider the case of cross-flow past a three-dimensional elastic rod suspended
under gravity, characterized experimentally by Silva-Leon et al. [101]. Figure 3a presents the initial setup—a three-dimensional
elastic rod is immersed in a constant, unbounded, background free stream of velocity V∞ˆi and is subject to the gravity field −gˆk.
The rod is clamped at its top end, allowing it to deform in response to the surrounding cross-flow. Computational setup details
can be found in Fig. 3. We simulate the system long enough until the rod deforms and attains a steady deformed equilibrium state,
where the drag forces due to cross-flow are balanced by gravity and by the restoring internal stresses. This equilibrium state of
the rod is visualized via volume rendered vorticity magnitude, for a particular cross-flow speed, in Fig. 3b. Next, for quantitative
validation, we characterize the deformed state via θ, the angle between the axis of the rod and the direction of the free stream
flow. We then measure the deformation angleθ for different flow speeds (which correspond to different Reynolds numbers Re) and
compare it against the experiments of Silva-Leon et al. [101]. As seen from Fig. 3c, our results agree with the benchmark [101].
8Figure 2: Flapping of a two-dimensional elastic rod in the wake of a rigid cylinder. (a) Setup. The 2D rigid cylinder of diameter D is initialized inside a 2D flow
domain of size (17.5D, 6.5625D), with its center at (3D, 3.28125D). The 2D elastic rod with length L = 3.5D, AR = 17.5 and mass per unit length me, is initialized
with one end fixed at (3.5D, 3.28125D) and centerline at y = 3.28125D. Both these bodies are immersed in a viscous fluid with a background free-stream velocity
V∞ˆi. Additionally, two no-slip walls are initialized at y = 1.28125D and y = 5.28125D, respectively. The key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark
are tV∞/D, Re := V∞D/ν f = 100, Kb = 0.02177 and non-dimensional mass ratio Me = me/ρ f L = 0.5714. Other computational parameters are CFL = 0.1,
α =−5× 104 andβ =−20. (b) Snapshot of the vorticity field (orange and blue indicate positive and negative vorticity respectively) for tV∞D≈ 77, depicting the
rod flapping motion and vortex shedding. (c) Comparison of temporal variation of the rod tip’s horizontal and vertical displacements against previous studies [98].
(d) Grid convergence. Error norms for the amplitudes of the rod tip’s vertical and horizontal displacements, plotted against grid spacing h. Further details can be
found under the examples/2d_examples/VortexInducedFlagFlappingCase folder of [100].
Next, we present the grid convergence for this case, by tracking the deformation angle θ for a particular free stream speed
(Re = 29.139), and computing the error norms against the best resolved case. With CFL = 0.1, we vary the spatial resolution
between 96× 96× 24 and 384× 384× 96 (with 512× 128× 128 as the best resolved case). As seen from Fig. 3d, our method
presents convergence between first and second order (least square fit of 1.81), consistent with the proposed algorithm.
5.3. Self-propelled soft anguilliform swimmers
Following the successful validation of our technique against a three-dimensional static benchmark, we now demonstrate its
ability to capture untethered, three-dimensional coupled dynamics, via the case of a self-propelled anguilliform swimmer immersed
in a viscous fluid. We point out that this benchmark is the most demanding of those illustrated so far. This is because the val-
idation depends on precisely capturing the dynamics of active, unconstrained slender bodies with varying cross-sections, while
simultaneously resolving the interplay between body inertia, elasticity, viscous drag and flow inertia.
In Figure 4a we presents the physical setup of the anguilliform swimmer, as described by Kern and Koumoutsakos [102]. The
swimmer has length L, a cross-section that varies along the centerline coordinate s∈ [0, L], and is immersed in an unbounded
fluid of the same density. The body geometry of the swimmer is described by the half-width w(s) in two dimensions, and by the
half-width w(s) and half-height h(s) in three dimensions (see Appendix B). In Kern and Koumoutsakos [102], the swimmer’s
deformation (gait) is kinematically imposed, i.e. the influence of the fluid on the fish only a ffects rigid body translational and
rotational velocity components. Here instead, the body of the fish is an elastic Cosserat rod, fully coupled to the flow and actuated
using a traveling wave of torques and forces, modeling muscular actuation [74]. Here, torques and forces are back-calculated so as
to reproduce the body lateral undulations of Kern and Koumoutsakos [102], in turn based on Carling et al. [16]. For this gait, the
lateral displacement of the mid-line y(s, t), is defined as
y(s, t) = 0.125L
0.03125 + s
L
1.03125 sin

2π
 s
L− t
T

(38)
where t is the time and T is the period. Additional computational details can be found in the caption of Fig. 4, while the procedure
to determine the actuation parameters are reported in Appendix C.
9Figure 3: Cross-flow past a three-dimensional elastic rod under gravity. (a) Setup. A 3D elastic rod with length L, AR = 11, ρ = 826.45 is initialized inside
a 3D flow domain of size (1 .8L, 0.45L, 1.8L), with one end fixed at (0 .36L, 0.225L, 1.35L) and center-line along x = 0.36L. The rod is immersed in a viscous
flow with a free-stream velocity V∞ˆi and a gravitational field −gˆk. The rod deflection angle θ is measured at equilibrium, where a balance between elastic,
flow and gravitational forces is present. The key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark are Kb, Froude number Fr := gD/V2
∞, stretch to bending ratio
Ks/Kb := EAL 2/(EI) = 62500 and Re := V∞D/ν f . Other computational parameters are CFL =0.1,α =−2× 104, and β =−102. (b) Snapshot of the steady state
deformation of the elastic rod with volume rendering of vorticity magnitude (lighter and darker blue indicate lower and higher vorticity magnitude, respectively).
The physical parameters for this simulation are set toRe = 29.139, Kb = 0.0309, and Fr = 3.24× 10−3. The spatial resolution of the domain is set to 256× 256× 64.
(c) Comparison of rod deflectionθ vs Re against empirical (black line) [101] and experimental (red circles) [101] results. In order to be consistent with experiments,
we vary Kb as Kb = 534.47/Re2 and Fr as Fr = 2.75/Re2. (d) Grid convergence. Error norm of rod deflection θ for Re = 29.139 plotted against grid spacing h.
Further details can be found under the examples/3d_examples/FlowPastRodCase folder of [100].
In all simulations, the elastic swimmer starts from a straight, rest configuration and actuation forces and torques are gradually
increased from zero to their designated values during the first cycle. We simulate the swimmers long enough until they reach a steady
swimming average terminal speed. For a two-dimensional swimmer, the vorticity contours at a particular time instance are reported
in Fig. 4b. In three dimensions, vortex rings are observed in the swimmer’s wake, visualized via the volume rendered Q-criterion at
a particular time instance (Fig. 4c). The wakes of both 2D and 3D swimmers are found to be qualitatively consistent with benchmark
literature [33, 102]. Next, we proceed with quantitatively validating our simulations by characterizing the swimmers’ motion via
the velocity components of the center of mass (normalized by the velocity scaleL/T) that are parallel (V∥) and perpendicular (V⊥) to
the swimming direction. We track the temporal variation of the velocity componentsV∥ and V⊥ and compare them against previous
studies [33, 102]. As seen from Fig. 4d for the three-dimensional case, our results show close agreement with the benchmarks. The
two-dimensional quantitative comparison is instead reported in the Appendix D for brevity, albeit we note similar good agreement
as for the 3D case. Finally, we present the grid convergence by tracking the terminal velocity componentsV∥ and V⊥ and computing
the error norms against the best resolved case. For three-dimensional swimming, with CFL = 0.1, we vary the spatial resolution
between 256× 128× 32 and 512× 256× 64 (with 768× 384× 96 as the best resolved case). As seen from Fig. 4e, our method
presents convergence between first and second order (least squares fit of 1.16 for V⊥ and 2.1 for V∥), again consistent with the
spatial discretization employed in our algorithm.
Overall the results of this Section validate our algorithm against a range of benchmarks, showing the accuracy and robustness
of our numerical scheme and its implementation. These results are complemented by a convergence analysis which is found to be
consistent with the employed discrete operators and across physical scenarios.
6. Multi-physics illustrations
Here, we further highlight the versatility of our solver by demonstrating a range of multi-physics applications. These include
flow past a three-dimensional soft rod in an inertia dominated flow environment, viscous streaming induced by magnetic soft
assemblies of filaments, and the locomotion of a self-propelling soft octopus. Before proceeding with the illustrations, we recall the
key dimensionless parameters Eqs. 36 and 37 that govern the dynamics of these systems, along with their physical interpretations—
Re (Reynolds number) defined as the ratio of inertial to viscous forces,Cau (Cauchy number) as the ratio of inertial to elastic forces,
ρ (density ratio) as the ratio of body inertia to flow inertia,AR (aspect ratio) as the ratio of body length to diameter, andKb (bending
stiffness) as the ratio of bending forces to inertial forces.
6.1. Three-dimensional flapping of an elastic rod
For this demonstration we consider the three-dimensional flapping of an elastic rod due to an inertia dominated flow character-
ized by Re∼O

103

. Such inertia dominated flow regimes typically present fine spatio-temporal flow features, which necessitate
10Figure 4: Self-propelled elastic anguilliform swimmers in two and three dimensions. (a) Setup. An elastic swimmer with length L, arc-length s∈ [0, L], half width
w(s) and half height h(s) is immersed in an unbounded flow domain and is actuated using forces and torques that generate the periodic mid-line kinematics (with
time-period T) described in Eq. 38. Here, we consider two- and three-dimensional variants of the swimmer, where w(s) defines the geometry in 2D, while w(s)
and h(s) define the geometry of the body in 3D (see Appendix B). In order to capture the e ffect of varying cross-sections on the swimmer dynamics, we modify Ii
(the second moment of the area around the i-director) accordingly along the rod. In 2D, the elastic swimmer is initialized with its head ( s = 0) at (5.45L, 0.68L)
in a flow domain of size (7L, 1.38L). In 3D, the body head is initialized at (2.9L, L, 0.25L) in a flow domain of size (4L, 2.0L, 0.5L). The elastic swimmer’s
motion is characterized via the velocity components of the center of mass, that are parallel ( V∥) and perpendicular (V⊥) to the swimming direction. These velocity
components (V∥ and V⊥) are normalized by the velocity scale L/T. Key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark are t/T,ρ = 1, actuation Reynolds number
Re := L2/(Tν f ) = 7142, Kb (set as 0.7044 in 2D and 0.1724 in 3D). Other computational parameters are CFL = 0.1,α (set as−8× 104 in 2D and−3.2× 104 in
3D) andβ (set as−10 in 2D and−32 in 3D). (b) Snapshot of the vorticity field (orange and blue indicate positive and negative vorticity, respectively) fort/T = 10,
depicting the wake generated by the 2D soft swimmer. The spatial resolution of the 2D domain for the visualized case is set as 3072× 614. (c) Snapshot of the wake
generated by the 3D soft swimmer with the volume rendered Q-criterion (orange and blue indicate vorticity and strain dominated areas, respectively) for t/T = 6.
Inset on the top left corner shows the isometric view of the snapshot. The spatial resolution of the 3D domain for the visualized case is set as 768 × 384× 96. (d)
Validation. Comparison of temporal variation of the elastic swimmer’s velocity components ( V∥ and V⊥) against previous studies [102, 33] for the 3D swimmer.
Validation for the 2D swimmer can be found in Fig. D.9a. (e) Grid convergence. Error norm of V∥ plotted against grid spacing h for the 3D swimmer. Convergence
study of the 2D swimmer can be found in Fig. D.9b. Further details can be found under the examples/2d_examples/FishSwimmingCase folder for the 2D
swimmer and the examples/3d_examples/FishSwimmingCase folder for the 3D swimmer of [100].
11high-resolution simulations to accurately resolve the system dynamics. To enable high-resolution simulations, we implement a par-
allel MPI (Message Passing Interface) based version [103] of our algorithm that maps onto distributed computing architectures (for
implementation details see Appendix E). Through this case we then demonstrate how our parallel implementation scales effectively
across state-of-the-art distributed computing systems.
We begin, as shown in Fig. 5a (upper left inset), by initializing a three-dimensional elastic rod immersed in a constant, un-
bounded, background free stream of velocity V∞ˆi. The rod is clamped at its upstream end and is free to rotate about its axis, thus
allowing flapping and rotation in response to the surrounding flow. Additional geometric and parametric details can be found in
Fig. 5. We simulate this system long enough until the rod sheds vortices, and eventually reaches either a periodic, quasi-periodic or
chaotic state, depending on the rod elasticity Kb. This state is visualized via the volume rendered Q-criterion at a particular time in-
stance and Kb, in Fig. 5a. To characterize the dynamical behavior of the system, we simulate it for varying rod stiffness Kb and track
the coordinate of the rod’s free tip (marked in Fig. 5a, upper left inset) over time (lower right inset of Fig. 5a). In Fig. 5b, the Fourier
analysis of the rod tip’s position history is presented for different values of Kb, with the rod’s lateral displacement trajectories shown
in the insets. When the rod is stiff (represented by higher values of Kb, shown in the top two plots of Fig. 5b), its dynamics are peri-
odic, characterized by a single peak in the Fourier analysis and a periodic limit cycle in the tip trajectory insets. As the rod becomes
softer (i.e. Kb decreases), additional frequency modes emerge in the Fourier spectrum, represented by additional smaller peaks in
the Fourier analysis (bottom left plot), and the system transitions from periodic to quasi-periodic dynamics. This is reflected as a
quasi-cycle (an approximate cycle that does not repeat exactly) in the trajectory inset. Further reduction in the rod’s sti ffness Kb
results in a transition to chaotic dynamics, demonstrated by a continuous frequency spectrum in the Fourier space (bottom right
plot), and chaotic non-repeating curves in the tip trajectory inset. Previous reports have indicated similar dynamical transitions in
flapping two-dimensional filaments [104, 105], but no study has investigated three-dimensional counterparts. Although a complete
analysis of this system lies beyond the scope of the current paper, this illustration showcases how our algorithm, combined with
high-performance computing strategies, can be employed to explore uncharted systems requiring high fidelity simulations, with
potential applications in energy harvesting, drag reduction, and related fields.
We conclude this investigation by highlighting how the parallel implementation of our algorithm scales effectively across mul-
tiple distributed computing systems. In Fig. 5c, we present the speedup values for both weak (scaling domain size with the number
of processes) and strong (keeping the problem size fixed while varying the number of processes) scaling, as a function of the num-
ber of employed processes (for details see Fig. 5 caption). The results depicted in Fig. 5c demonstrate that the weak and strong
scaling trends align closely with the ideal theoretical trend up to approximately one thousand employed processes, underscoring
the efficiency of our algorithm, on top of its accuracy, versatility and relative simplicity.
6.2. Streaming flow generation via magnetized filament assemblies
Here we demonstrate our solver’s ability to capture second-order flow physics and rectification, via the example of viscous
streaming generated by magnetized filament assemblies. Viscous streaming, an inertial phenomenon, refers to the steady, time-
averaged flow that emerges when a immersed body undergoes small-amplitude oscillations within a viscous fluid. Due to its ability
to reconfigure flow topology over short time and length scales, viscous streaming has found applications in multiple aspects of
microfluidics, from particle manipulation and drug delivery to chemical mixing [108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114]. Despite
comprehensive understanding of rigid body streaming [115, 116, 114], little is known when body elasticity is involved [117, 118,
119], and even less so when multiple soft streaming bodies are involved. Yet, the rectification of flow through systems comprised of
several soft components is pertinent to various biological contexts, including flows produced by ciliated organisms like bacteria and
larvae [12]. Cilia, slender hair-like structures located on the outer surface of the organism, drive these flows typically by deforming
with a spatial phase di fference, termed metachrony, so as to form wave-like motions [120] Metachronal waves have then been
hypothesized to generate, in some cases, streaming flows for feeding or locomotion [12]. Thus, motivated by the potential utility of
filament arrays for streaming flow manipulation, we explore here the possible use of synthetic, magnetically driven cilia carpets, as
detailed in the study by Gu et al. [8].
Before proceeding, we first describe the computational details involved in the modeling of magnetic filaments. We assume that
each filament carries within its local frame a homogeneous and permanent magnetization, characterized by the magnetic dipole
moment density m. An external, driving magnetic field, characterized by magnetic flux density B, is assumed to be unidirectional
and spatially homogeneous (i.e. gradients are identically zero). Then, at any time instant, the magnetic field generates an external
torque c along the rod, which is described by
c = QT mδV× B (39)
whereδV is the local differential volume and Q is the local frame of reference. For details concerning the numerical implementation
of the magnetic torques, the reader is referred to [75].
Next, we adopt the physical setup shown in Fig. 6a, where a uniform, rectangular arrangement of cilia carpet with 32× 16 rods
of length Le is immersed in an unbounded viscous fluid. Similar to Gu et al. [8], the cilia carpet is strongly magnetized with phases
varying in a harmonic fashion along the x direction, with a non-dimensional wavelength ˆλ = λ/Lcx, where Lcx is the carpet span
along the x axis. Further details concerning the simulation setup, are reported in the caption of Fig. 6. The carpet is subjected to a
12Figure 5: Flow past a three-dimensional elastic rod in an inertial flow regime. (a) Setup (top-left inset). A soft Cosserat rod of length L, AR = 20, ρ = 1000 is
initialized inside a 3D flow domain of size (5 L, 1.25L, 1.25L), with one freely rotating end (along its axis) clamped at (0 .625L, 2.51L, 2.51L) and with centerline
along x = 0.625L. The rod is immersed in a viscous flow with a free-stream velocityV∞ˆi. The key non-dimensional parameters in this illustration are t/T = tV∞/L,
Re := V∞L/ν f and Kb. Other computational parameters are CFL = 0.1,α =−2× 104 andβ = 10. Snapshot of the flow generated by the flapping rod visualized
via the volume rendered Q-criterion (orange and blue indicate vorticity and strain dominated areas, respectively) for t/T = 120. The trajectory of the free end
tip position is tracked over time as shown in the bottom right inset. The spatial resolution of the 3D domain is set to 1024 × 256× 256. (b) Fourier analysis of
the rod tip’s position history for varying Kb, illustrating the emergence of additional frequency modes as Kb decreases. The appearance of these additional modes
corresponds to the system transitioning from periodic to quasi-periodic to finally chaotic behaviour, as qualitatively seen in the traverse tip deflection visualized in
the insets (the axes are set to range from -0.05L to 0.05L). (c) Plot of the scaled speedup against the number of employed processes, illustrating the weak and strong
scalability of our algorithm when mapped onto distributed parallel architectures. For weak scaling, we set 32 3 as the spatial resolution per process, and record the
timings as a function of the number of processes. For strong scaling we set the spatial resolution to 3843, and record the timings with varying number of processes.
The timing related simulations are conducted on Stampede2 KNL nodes [106], and the reported speedups are obtained by scaling with theO(n log n) complexity of
Fourier-based Poisson solve operation [107]. Further details can be found under the examples/3d_examples/FlowPastFreelyRotatingRod folder of [103].
weak, sinusoidally rotating external magnetic field of angular frequencyω in the x-z plane, which creates a metachronal wave that
propagates along the x direction (see Appendix G). As can be seen in Fig. 6, this metachronal wave is indeed found to generate
a steady streaming response in the surrounding fluid. Following classical streaming literature [121], we characterize this response
via the Womersley number M defined as M := Le
pω/ν f . The streaming flow response for the base case of M = 1 and ˆλ = 1 is
visualized via time-averaged Eulerian streamlines in Fig. 6b-d. This illustrates that a steady, centered vortex appears above the cilia
carpet, consistent with the experiments of Gu et al. [8].
Next, we examine the effect of varying Womersley number (M) and metachronal wavelength ˆλ on the streaming flow topology.
We show in Fig. 6(e-g) the time-averaged Eulerian streamlines for a fixed M = 1 and varying non-dimensional wavelength ˆλ = 1,
ˆλ = 2, and ˆλ = 4. The wavelength captures the synchronization among the cilia, with ˆλ→∞ indicating synchronous motion across
all cilia. With increasing ˆλ, we observe the dissolution of the well-defined, centered vortex, consistent with observations made in
13(c) (d)
(b)(a)
(e) (f) (g)
(h) (i) (j)
(l)
-0.04
-0.08
0
cilia height
cilia height
1 3 520 4
-0.1
0
-0.2
-0.3
0.1(k)
1 3 520 4
Figure 6: Streaming flow generation via magnetized filament assemblies. (a) Setup. A three-dimensional magnetic cilia carpet, composed of individual elastic
rods of length Le, and arranged in a rectangular uniform grid of 32 by 16 rods is initialized in a three-dimensional flow domain. The carpet has a span of Lcx
and Lcy along the x and y directions, respectively, with a rod-to-rod spacing of Le/2 along x and y axes. Each filament, with AR = 5 and ρ = 2390, is initialized
with the lower end fixed, and the centerline pointing along the z direction. The fluid domain is of size ( Lcx + 2Le, Lcy + 2Le, 5Le) with the spatial resolution set
as 384× 208× 110 throughout. Similar to the experimental setting of Gu et al. [8], the cilia are strongly magnetized with magnetic dipole moment density m,
where m = m sinθi + m cosθk. Here the magnetization angle θ varies spatially along the x direction following an antiplectic pattern with non-dimensionalized
wavelength ˆλ = λ/Lcx. Following setup, the cilia carpet is subjected to a weak, oscillatory magnetic field of strength B that rotates sinusoidally in the x− z plane
given by B = B sin(ωt)i + B cos(ωt)k. The key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark are the Womerseley number M := Le
pω/ν f , magnetic Bond
number Bo := (mBAL2)/(EI) = 3.0 (ratio of magnetic to elastic forces), and the non-dimensional oscillation frequency of the magnetic field ω/ω0 = 0.16926,
whereω0 = 3.5160/L2
e
p
EI/(ρeA) is the natural frequency of the filament’s first bending mode. Other computational parameters are CFL =0.1,α =−2× 104, and
β =−10. The rotating magnetic field creates a metachronal wave that propagates in the x-direction along the cilia carpet, ultimately generating streaming flow on
top of the carpet. Streaming flow topology visualized via the Eulerian time-averaged streamlines for M = 1 and ˆλ = 1 (orange and blue represent positive and
negative x-velocities, respectively) in (b) an isometric view (c)y− z plane and (d) x− z plane, respectively. (e-g) Flow topology variation withM = 1 and increasing
wavelength ˆλ, with (e) ˆλ = 1 (f) ˆλ = 2 and (g) ˆλ = 4. Streaming eddies visualized via particle trajectories from equivalent experiments of Gu et al. [8] (with
one-to-one ˆλ values) are included as yellow inset boxes for reference. (h-j) Flow topology variation with ˆλ = 1 and increasing M, with (h) M = 1 (i) M = 2 and (j)
M = 3. (k-l) Non-dimensional fluid transport fluxϕ/ωL2
e (Eq. 40) along x axis (measured at the carpet midplane x = Le/2) plotted against z coordinate, for varying
(k) ˆλ and (l) M. Further details can be found under the examples/3d_examples/MagneticCiliaCarpetCase folder of [100].
14experiments (shown as insets) with equivalent wavelengths [8]. We subsequently consider a fixed wavelength ˆλ = 1 and a varying
Womersley numberM = 1, M = 2, and M = 3 (Fig. 6h-j). This corresponds to a transition of the flow from a viscosity-dominated to
an inertia-dominated regime. We observe that with increasingM, the central vortex shifts in a direction opposite to the metachronal
wave propagation direction, eventually breaking down into a collection of smaller eddies.
Finally, we characterize quantitatively the streaming flow strength via the non-dimensional fluid transport fluxϕ/(ωL2
e) in the x
direction, measured at the central y-z plane of the fluid domain. The dimensional flux ϕ is defined as
ϕ(z) =
Z Lcy
0
vx(y, z) dy (40)
where Lcy is the carpet span along the y axis, and vx(y, z) is the flow speed along x axis at x = Lcx/2. We then trackϕ as a function
of distance above the carpet (z) with varying wavelength ˆλ (Fig. 6k) and Womersley number M (Fig. 6l). Consistent with findings
of Gu et al. [8], the flow strength decreases with increasing ˆλ, implying diminishing streaming e ffects. In contrast, varying M
(keeping ˆλ = 1 fixed) produces stronger non-linearities, and a local maximum of the transport flux near M = 2. Overall, the
above-demonstrated generation and tunability of streaming flows via artificial filament arrays hints at their potential in microfluidic
applications, from particle manipulation and transport to chemical mixing [122], while underscoring the ability of our solver to
capture such complex second order effects, in agreement with experiments.
6.3. Octopus swimming
Here we demonstrate the versatility of our proposed algorithm in incorporating features of bio-inspired, soft robotic locomotion,
namely endogenous biomechanical muscle models, muscular actuations, and soft body assembly, via the case of a self-propelling
octopus. Muscular hydrostats, such as octopus arms, are unique in that they lack bones altogether, relying solely on intricate
weavings of muscle fibers within their architecture. These structures confer unparalleled coordination and reconfiguration abilities,
endowing these animals with remarkable manipulation skills. These distinctive features have drawn the attention of biologists and
soft roboticists to model and characterize the octopus’ underwater manipulation and locomotion strategies [123, 124]. However,
these studies employ simplistic drag models or neglect elasticity and the arm’s internal structure, and thus fall short of resolving the
two-way coupling with the flow environment, as well as the effect of the muscular structure, on the resultant dynamics.
Recently, bio-realistic models based on Cosserat rods have been developed to replicate the heterogeneous organization and
the bio-mechanics of the octopus arms [3]. In particular, these models capture the role of the muscular architecture in translating
non-linear one-dimensional muscle contraction into complex three-dimensional motions, as observed in actual octopuses. In this
study, we represent each octopus arm as a Cosserat rod, and actuate it using a virtual muscle model [68] based on the understanding
developed in [3]. In the virtual muscle model, the contraction of virtual muscles generates forces f and torques Qc on the arm
center-line [68]. These contractile forces are modeled as
fm := aσmaxAmh(lm) (41)
where a denotes the muscle activation level,σmax := 10E represents the maximum muscle stress, E is Young’s modulus of the arm,
Am :=πr2
m denotes the muscle cross-sectional area, and h(lm)∈ [0, 1] is the normalized force-length relationship obtained by fitting
experimental octopus data [125], and lm is the length of the muscle [68]. This framework allows us to integrate experimentally
obtained biomechanical data through the term h(lm), while investigating different neuro-muscular activations via the term a. Next,
in order to generate the swimming stroke motion, we use a travelling wave activation profile similar to the one presented in Kazakidi
et al. [123].
a(s, t) = amax
 cos (πs) + 1
2
!4
sin2

2πw s
L−π t
T

(42)
where amax = 0.2 is the maximum activation magnitude, T is the period, and w = 0.05 is the wave number [123]. In all our
simulations, the octopus starts from a rest configuration and the muscle activation amax is gradually increased from zero to the
designated value during the first period.
In the following, we describe the physical setup of the octopus swimming experiment, as shown in Fig. 7a. This computational
experiment involves an eight armed octopus immersed in a three-dimensional unbounded viscous flow. Each soft arm is modeled as
a tapered Cosserat rod of length L. The arms and the rigid spherical head are connected to the elastic body through spring-damper
boundary conditions. The arms are actuated by contracting their (virtual) longitudinal muscles, following the activation profile
specified in Eq. 42. Additional details about the simulations are provided in the caption of Fig. 7. Two octopuses are considered in
the experiment: an adult and a juvenile. For the adult octopus, the key non-dimensional parameters Kb, actuation Reynolds number
Rea := LD/(Tν f ), AR, and the taper ratio are based on measurements from experimental studies [71, 126, 1]. The juvenile octopus
is a geometrically scaled down version of the adult octopus, roughly 10× smaller in size [127]. We then assume that the juvenile
octopus has the same activation functiona(s, t), E, AR, and taper ratio as that of the adult, which results in the adult and the juvenile
15Figure 7: Octopus swimming. (a) Setup. An eight armed octopus with soft, tapered arms is immersed in a three-dimensional, unbounded, viscous flow. Each soft
arm is modeled as a Cosserat rod with length L, arc-length s∈ [0, L], radius r(s)∈ [rb, rt] (at base r(0) = rb and at tip r(L) = rt), taper ratio rb/rt = 12, base
AR := L/(2rb) = 4.16, and is actuated via muscular forces and torques. These forces and torques are computed using the virtual muscle model, where two virtual
longitudinal muscles (depicted as pink rods) upon contraction generate external forces f and external torques Qc on the arm centerline x(s, t) [68]. The longitudinal
muscles of radius rm(s, t) := 0.25r(s, t) are attached at xm(s, t) = x(s, t)± 0.625r(s, t)d1(s, t). All 8 arms are actuated by contracting the inside longitudinal muscle,
marked in (a), via a traveling wave activation profile of time-period T described in Eq. 42. The octopus head is modeled as a rigid sphere with diameter D = 0.12L
and center initialized at (3.15L, 1.25L, 1.25L). The eight arms and the head of the octopus are connected via the octopus body, which is modeled as a soft tapered
Cosserat rod. The fluid domain is of size (5 L, 2.5L, 2.5L) with the spatial resolution of the domain set as 392 × 196× 196 throughout. We consider two di fferent
flow regimes in this study, specifically regimes in which juvenile and adult octopus are observed. Key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark are t/T,
ρ = 1.02, actuation Reynolds number Rea := LD/(Tν f ) (set as 48 for juvenile and 4800 for adult),Kb (set as 8.3 for juvenile and 0.083 for adult), and the swimming
Reynolds number Resw := v f D/ν f , which emerges as O (10) for juvenile andO

102
for adult octopus, based on the observed swimming speeds shown in (f).
Other computational parameters are CFL = 0.1,α =−2× 104 andβ =−10. Snapshots of the volume rendered vorticity magnitude field (white and blue indicates
lower and higher vorticity, respectively) around the juvenile octopus for (b) power stroke at t/T ≈ 2.4 and (c) recovery stroke at t/T ≈ 2.9. Snapshots of the
wake generated by the adult octopus, with the volume rendered vorticity magnitude field for (d) power stroke at t/T ≈ 4.6 and (e) recovery stroke at t/T ≈ 5.1.
Temporal variation of the octopus head’s swimming (f) velocity and (g) position in the adult and juvenile flow regimes. Further details can be found under the
examples/3d_examples/OctopusSwimming folder of [100].
octopus operating in di fferent flow regimes, characterized by distinct values of the arm sti ffness Kb and the actuation Reynolds
number Rea.
We begin with visualizing the flow generated by the adult and juvenile octopuses while swimming across the flow domain.
Figure 7b presents the power stroke of the juvenile octopus swimming, (visualized via the volume-rendered vorticity magnitude
field), where the eight arms generate an octuplet of vortex rings, which are then shed during the recovery stroke shown in Fig. 7c,
resulting in forward propulsion of the octopus. For the adult case instead, an increase in the actuation Reynolds numberRea causes
the vortex rings to break down into a jet, as seen from the power and recovery strokes shown in Fig. 7d and e, respectively. Next, we
16present the temporal variation of the octopus’ swimming velocity and its head’s position, in both adult and juvenile flow regimes,
in Fig. 7f and g. The non-dimensional swimming speed of the juvenile octopus is found to be larger than that of the adult, which
is consistent with previous observations of octopuses of different sizes [24]. Overall, this demonstration provides valuable insights
into the swimming behavior of octopuses and can be leveraged in the future to develop efficient soft robotic systems inspired by the
locomotion strategies of these animals.
7. Conclusion
In summary, we have presented a framework that integrates vortex methods and Cosserat rod theory to capture the two-way
flow-structure interaction between multiple heterogeneous, slender soft bodies immersed in a viscous fluid. Our approach employs
the penalty immersed boundary method to couple the fluid and the immersed soft structure, while accurately accounting for the
mechanics of soft bodies via Cosserat rod theory. The algorithm we have developed is straightforward and concise, while still being
accurate and robust, as demonstrated by rigorous benchmarking and convergence analysis against a wide range of experimental and
numerical tests. Through various multifaceted illustrations (which themselves may serve as detailed benchmarks for future studies),
we further demonstrate our solver’s versatility, applicability and robustness across multiphysics scenarios, boundary conditions,
constitutive and actuation models. Particularly, the accurate resolution of a wide range of physics encompassing muscle actuation,
multi-body connection, self-propulsion, streaming and magnetism in a scalable fashion, demonstrates the utility of our method
in a wide range of applications, from bio-locomotion and soft robotics to microfluidics. While our algorithm has shown to scale
effectively across distributed computing systems, the use of convenient grid-based operators for solving the flow equations renders
the solver portable, in a scalable fashion, to advanced parallel architectures such as GPUs. However, beyond porting the algorithm
to GPUs, opportunities for algorithmic improvement also exist. First, instead of the current mollification approach, modified
higher-order stencils can be utilized to resolve the physics near the interface [128, 129, 130] to improve grid convergence now
limited between first and second order. Second, an unconditionally stable temporal integration algorithm can be applied to solve
for the diffusion step [131] to achieve faster time-to-solutions in viscous flow regimes. Finally, a time step restriction based on the
shear wave speed inside the elastic solid can be bypassed through the use of an implicit time stepper [96] or a local time-stepping
technique [36]. All the above directions are avenues of future work.
8. CRediT authorship contribution statement
Arman Tekinalp: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Vi-
sualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Yashraj Bhosale: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal
Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
Songyuan Cui: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualiza-
tion, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Fan Kiat Chan: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal Analysis,
Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.Mattia Gaz-
zola:Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal Analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration,
Resources, Software, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.
9. Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
10. Acknowledgements
This study was jointly funded by ONR MURI N00014-19-1-2373 (M.G.), ONR N00014-22-1-2569 (M.G.), NSF EFRI C3 SoRo
#1830881 (M.G.), NSF CAREER #1846752 (M.G.), and with computational support provided by the Bridges2 supercomputer at
the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center through allocation TG-MCB190004 from the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery
Environment (XSEDE; NSF grant ACI-1548562).
Appendix A. Validation of flow past a two-dimensional elastic rod under gravity
We test our method for the ability to capture the dynamics of two-dimensional elastic structures immersed in viscous fluids. To
do so we adopt the benchmark of flow past a two-dimensional elastic rod suspended under gravity, commonly used for validation
in flag flapping studies [84, 132]. Figure A.8a presents the initial setup—a two-dimensional elastic rod of length L is immersed
in a constant, unbounded, background free stream of velocity V∞ˆi and under the gravitational field gˆi. The rod is clamped at the
17Figure A.8: Flow past a two-dimensional elastic rod under gravity. (a) Setup. The 2D elastic rod with length L, AR = 50 and mass per unit length me, is initialized
inside a 2D flow domain of size (6L, 3L), with one end fixed at (L, 1.503L) and centerline at y = 1.503L. The rod is immersed in a viscous fluid, under a gravity field
gˆi and a background free-stream velocity V∞ˆi. The key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark are convective time unit tV∞/L, Re := V∞L/ν f = 200, Kb =
0.0015, non-dimensional mass ratio Me = me/ρ f L = 1.5 and Froude number Fr := gL/V2
∞ = 0.5. Other computational parameters are CFL = 0.1,α =−8× 104
and β = 30. (b) Snapshot of the vorticity field (orange and blue indicate positive and negative vorticity respectively) for tV∞L≈ 70, depicting the rod flapping
motion and vortex shedding. (c) Comparison of temporal variation of rod tip’s vertical displacement against previous studies [132]. (d) Grid convergence. Error
norm of rod tip’s vertical displacement amplitude plotted against grid spacingh. Further details can be found under examples/2d_examples/FlowPastRodCase
folder of [100].
upstream end, allowing the rod to flap freely in response to the surrounding flow and gravity. Computational setup details can be
found in Fig. A.8.
We simulate the system long enough to observe von K ´arm´an vortices, and eventually the system reaches a dynamically quasi-
steady, periodic state. This state is visualized via the vorticity contours at a particular time instance, as shown in Fig. A.8b. Next,
to validate our method, we track the vertical coordinate of the rod’s free tip and compare it against the periodic tip response from
previous studies [132]. As seen from Fig. A.8c, our results show close quantitative agreement with the previous study [132].
We then present the grid convergence for this benchmark, by tracking the amplitude of the rod tip’s cross-stream oscillations
(Fig. A.8c), and computing the error norms with respect to the best resolved case. We fix CFL= 0.1 and vary the spatial resolution
between 256× 128 and 1024× 512 (with 2048× 1024 as the best resolved case). As seen from Fig. A.8d, our method presents grid
convergence between first and second order (least squares fit of 2.1), consistent with the spatial discretization of the operators.
Appendix B. Geometrical details of anguilliform swimmers
Here we describe the geometry used for the anguilliform swimmers shown in Section 5.3 of the main text. The swimmer is
modeled as an elastic rod with varying cross-section dependent on centerline coordinate s. The two-dimensional swimmer cross-
section is characterized using the half width w(s), while the three-dimensional swimmer cross-section is an ellipse with half width
w(s) and half height h(s). Following Gazzola et al. [33], the half width w(s) is defined as
w(s) =

p
2whs− s2 0 ⩽ s< sb
wh− (wh− wt)
 s−sb
st−sb
2
sb ⩽ s< st
wt L−s
L−st
st ⩽ s ⩽ L
(B.1)
where L is the body length, wh = sb = 0.04L, st = 0.95L and wt = 0.01L. In Gazzola et al. [33], the thickness reduction from head
to tail (sb ⩽ s < st) is linear instead of quadratic for the 2D case, therefore we implemented the same modification here. For 3D
swimmers, we define the half height h(s) following Gazzola et al. [33]
h(s) = b
r
1−
 s− a
a
2
(B.2)
18where a = 0.51L and b = 0.08L.
Appendix C. Muscular actuation of anguilliform swimmer
We start by creating a virtual rod that is identical to the elastic swimmer, with the former following precisely the kinematics
Eq. 38 suggested by Carling et al. [16]. Here, we update the directors of the virtual rod under the zero-shear assumption (d3≡ t).
Next, based on the updated positions and directors we compute the corresponding internal torques ¯τv within the virtual rod via
Eq. 5. The internal torques of the virtual rod are in turn translated into muscular torques τm acting upon the elastic swimmer via
frame transformation
τm(s, t) = QT
v (s, t)¯τv(s, t) (C.1)
where QT
v is the transpose of the virtual rod directors. Finally, since the elastic swimmer is free to shear (and therefore may deform
slightly different from the virtual rod), local correcting forces are computed, proportionally to the deviation between the elastic fish
and the virtual rod node positions
fm(s, t) = k (yv(s, t)− ye(s, t)) (C.2)
where k := EA is the spring constant, yv and ye are lateral displacements of the virtual rod and the elastic fish, respectively.
Appendix D. Two-dimensional anguilliform swimmer validation
Here we present the validation and convergence analysis for the two-dimensional anguilliform swimmer shown in Section 5.3.
For validation, we track the temporal variation of the velocity componentsV∥ and V⊥ of the 2D swimmer and compare them against
previous studies [33, 102]. As seen from Fig. D.9a, our results show close agreement with the benchmarks in two dimensions.
We next present the grid convergence for this case by tracking V∥ and V⊥ and computing the error norms against the best resolved
case. For two-dimensional swimming, with CFL = 0.1, we vary the spatial resolution between 1024× 204 and 2048× 409 (with
3072× 614 being the best resolved case). As shown in Fig. D.9b, our technique presents close to second order convergence (least
squares fit of 1.82 for V⊥ and 2.2 for V∥, respectively).
Figure D.9: Self-propelled elastic anguilliform swimmers in two dimensions. (a) Validation. Comparison of temporal variation of the elastic swimmer’s velocity
components (V∥ and V⊥) against previous studies [33, 102] for 2D swimmer. (b) Grid convergence. Error norms ofV∥ plotted against grid spacingh for 2D swimmer.
Appendix E. Algorithm mapping on distributed computing architectures for large-scale simulations
In this section, we provide additional details surrounding the mapping of our algorithm onto distributed computing architectures.
In the following, we describe how the flow and immersed body domains are decomposed and communicated across di fferent
computing processes.
Appendix E.1. Mapping flow domain
In the employed numerical method (Algorithm 1), the fluid domain, and hence the flow fields, are defined on structured or
uniform Cartesian meshes. This in turn results in rectangular (2D) or cuboidal (3D) physical and computational domains.
19Appendix E.1.1. Domain decomposition
In order to ensure balanced workloads between processors, we employ the Cartesian topology available via the Message Passing
Interface (MPI) [133, 134, 135, 136] for decomposing the fluid domain into equally-sized subdomains that are mapped onto different
processors (Fig. E.10a). Given the assigned subdomain, each processor then performs di fferential operations with mesh-based
kernels (i.e. numerical di fferential stencils). These local operations typically result in computational costs that scale linearly with
the number of grid points. However, in order to obtain the correct solution on the boundaries of these subdomains, communication
with the adjacent subdomain becomes necessary to ensure the local operations are carried out with the correct boundary data.
Figure E.10: (a) Domain decomposition for a representative 2D problem. We focus our example here on the purple central subdomain and use a nine-point stencil
to motivate the need for communication across subdomains residing on di fferent processes. We introduce ghost cells for storing data copied from neighboring
subdomains in order to ensure the correct computation of di fferential operators. (b) Ghost cell communication pattern for complete data exchange: receiving
(left)incoming and sending (right) outgoing data.
Appendix E.1.2. Communication
In order to exchange the boundary data between neighboring subdomains, we extend the subdomain by ns mesh points (grey
regions of subdomains in Fig. E.10), where ns is chosen based on the maximum kernel support required by the numerical stencils
employed in Algorithm 1. For example, a second-order central finite di fference stencil requires one adjacent mesh point for its
20kernel operation and thus has a kernel support of ns = 1. This extended layer of mesh points is commonly known as ghost /halo
points (Fig. E.10a), and stores updated copies of the data from the corresponding neighboring subdomains for consistent kernel
operation on the boundaries.
As an illustrative example, we show in Fig. E.10 the communication pattern involved for a 2D problem decomposed and dis-
tributed equally into 9 di fferent processors. We start by drawing our attention to the communication patterns involved for the
representative interior (purple) subdomain in Fig. E.10, and note that the communication pattern generically holds for other sub-
domains as well. The orange and blue regions indicate the subdomains directly and diagonally adjacent to the interior subdomain,
respectively. We then consider a representative nine-point stencil kernel (pink box in Fig. E.10a) that operates on the structured
mesh. As can be seen, in the extreme case of kernel operation at corner cells of our focal subdomain, the stencil involves infor-
mation from a total of three neighboring processes. This means that for the operator to be computed correctly on that corner cell,
communication needs to happen between the purple subdomain, two directly (orange) and one diagonally (blue) adjacent subdo-
mains. Figure E.10b illustrates the data flow for updating the ghost region that ensures correct computation of kernels with ns > 0
across all subdomains.
Appendix E.2. Mapping immersed body domain
The immersed structures in the employed numerical method (Algorithm 1) are defined on unstructured meshes. In order to
resolve the structural dynamics of the slender immersed bodies, we leverage pyelastica [95], a simple and convenient library for
simulating assemblies of slender, one-dimensional structures using Cosserat Rod theory. However, the package currently does not
support distributed computation. While it is reasonable to assign the Cosserat rod simulation on a single master process, information
from the updated structure will eventually be needed in corresponding flow subdomains during the flow–structure interaction step
in Algorithm 1. For the interaction to take place correctly, our algorithm requires the position, velocity and forces defined on the
unstructured mesh native to the immersed body. In the following, we describe how the immersed structure is distributed to and
retrieved from different processes throughout the interaction step in our method.
Figure E.11: Communication pattern involved for connecting structured and unstructured grids, thus allowing extension of flow simulator to interact with external
structural dynamics packages such as pyelastica [95] for Cosserat rod simulations.
Appendix E.2.1. Domain decomposition
Given the dynamic, unstructured nature of the moving immersed body, the master process will need to decompose the body’s
discretization mesh based on the position of the body’s grid points relative to the fluid subdomain, and remap them to the corre-
sponding fluid subdomain at every time step. This is done in a straightforward fashion based on the Cartesian topology established
by MPI [135, 136, 134, 137] for domain decomposition of the structured fluid domain (Appendix E.1).
Appendix E.2.2. Communication
Once the decomposition map is computed, relevant fields residing on the unstructured mesh can be communicated to and from
their corresponding subdomain for consistent resolution of flow–structure interaction. We summarize the communication pattern
for a simple unstructured body mesh in Fig. E.11. As described above, the master process first identifies the corresponding flow
subdomain to which every single point of the body grid resides in. This information is then stored in a mapping containing the
address of destination processes for each body grid point. Based on this mapping, the mesh points are communicated to the
21corresponding flow subdomain, followed by the flow–structure interaction step of Algorithm 1. Once the interaction is complete,
relevant updated fields such as forcing on the structure are returned from the subdomains back to the master process accordingly
based on the mapping established earlier. With the forcing information updated on the master process, pyelastica [95] then
performs temporal integration to advance the rod to the next time step, resulting in an updated position and velocity of the rod’s
unstructured mesh. This process is then repeated at every time step, thus ensuring a continuous and consistent workflow for the
fluid–structure interaction.
Appendix F. Validation for flow past a rigid sphere
Here we test our algorithm for its ability to capture flow–structure interaction physics for immersed rigid bodies, by considering
the classical case of flow past a fixed rigid sphere. Figure F.12a presents the initial setup—a fixed rigid sphere of diameter D
is immersed in a constant, unbounded, background free stream of velocity V∞ˆi (details in Fig. F.12 caption). We simulate the
system long enough until it reaches either a steady state (observed for Re < 200) or a quasi-steady periodic state (observed for
200 < Re < 1000). For low Re (< 200), a steady recirculation zone (eddy) attaches to the downstream end of the sphere, while
for moderate Re (200 < Re < 1000), periodic shedding of vortices is observed in the wake of the sphere. The periodic vortex
shedding state is visualized for a particular Re via the volume rendered Q-criterion in Fig. F.12b. As seen from Fig. F.12b, hair-
pin vortices are observed in the wake of the sphere, consistent with previous studies [138]. Next, for validation, we vary Re and
track two commonly used non-dimensional diagnostics: the length of the attached recirculation eddy s/D (only for Re< 200) and
the mean drag coe fficient CD for the sphere. Figure F.12c-d present the variations of recirculation eddy lengths and mean drag
coefficients with Re, with comparison against previous studies [138, 139, 140, 141]. As seen from Fig. F.12c-d, our results show
close agreement with previous studies.
Next, we present the grid convergence for this case, by tracking the mean drag coefficient CD for Re = 100, and computing the
error norms against the best resolved case. With CFL= 0.1, we vary the spatial resolution between 32×16×16 and 256×128×128
(with 512× 256× 256 as the best resolved case). As seen from Fig. F.12e, our method exhibits spatial convergence between first
and second order (least square fit of 1.53), consistent with the numerical discretization of our solver.
Appendix G. Animations of simulated cases
We have included animated videos of all cases simulated in the paper, which can be accessed through the following link.
Appendix H. Software
The implementation of the algorithm in this study and corresponding cases can be found here. For the MPI based implementa-
tion the reader is referred to this link.
References
[1] W. M. Kier, M. P. Stella, The arrangement and function of octopus arm musculature and connective tissue, Journal of morphology 268 (2007) 831–843.
[2] X. Zhang, F. K. Chan, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, Modeling and simulation of complex dynamic musculoskeletal architectures, Nature communications
10 (2019) 1–12.
[3] A. Tekinalp, N. Naughton, S.-H. Kim, U. Halder, R. Gillette, P. G. Mehta, W. Kier, M. Gazzola, Topology, dynamics, and control of an octopus-analog
muscular hydrostat, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.08413 (2023).
[4] C. Prior, Helical birods: an elastic model of helically wound double-stranded rods, Journal of Elasticity 117 (2014) 231–277.
[5] O. Weeger, A. H. Sakhaei, Y . Y . Tan, Y . H. Quek, T. L. Lee, S.-K. Yeung, S. Kaijima, M. L. Dunn, Nonlinear multi-scale modelling, simulation and validation
of 3d knitted textiles, Applied Composite Materials 25 (2018) 797–810.
[6] W. Arne, N. Marheineke, A. Meister, R. Wegener, Numerical analysis of cosserat rod and string models for viscous jets in rotational spinning processes,
Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 20 (2010) 1941–1965.
[7] A. Klar, N. Marheineke, R. Wegener, Hierarchy of mathematical models for production processes of technical textiles, ZAMM-Journal of Applied Mathe-
matics and Mechanics/Zeitschrift f¨ur Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik: Applied Mathematics and Mechanics 89 (2009) 941–961.
[8] H. Gu, Q. Boehler, H. Cui, E. Secchi, G. Savorana, C. De Marco, S. Gervasoni, Q. Peyron, T.-Y . Huang, S. Pane, et al., Magnetic cilia carpets with
programmable metachronal waves, Nature communications 11 (2020) 2637.
[9] N. Weiner, Y . Bhosale, M. Gazzola, H. King, Mechanics of randomly packed filaments—the “bird nest” as meta-material, Journal of Applied Physics 127
(2020) 050902.
[10] Y . Bhosale, N. Weiner, A. Butler, S. H. Kim, M. Gazzola, H. King, Micromechanical origin of plasticity and hysteresis in nestlike packings, Physical review
letters 128 (2022) 198003.
[11] O. Aydin, X. Zhang, S. Nuethong, G. J. Pagan-Diaz, R. Bashir, M. Gazzola, M. T. A. Saif, Neuromuscular actuation of biohybrid motile bots, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 116 (2019) 19841–19847.
[12] W. Gilpin, M. S. Bull, M. Prakash, The multiscale physics of cilia and flagella, Nature Reviews Physics 2 (2020) 74–88.
[13] T. Flash, B. Hochner, Motor primitives in vertebrates and invertebrates, Current opinion in neurobiology 15 (2005) 660–666.
[14] G. Sumbre, Y . Gutfreund, G. Fiorito, T. Flash, B. Hochner, Control of octopus arm extension by a peripheral motor program, Science 293 (2001) 1845–1848.
22Figure F.12: Flow past a rigid sphere. (a) Setup. The rigid sphere with diameter D is initialized inside a 3D flow domain of size (5D, 2.5D, 2.5D), and with its center
fixed at (1.25D, 1.25D, 1.25D). The sphere is immersed in a viscous flow with a free-stream velocity V∞ˆi. The key non-dimensional parameters in this benchmark
is Re := V∞D/ν f . Other computational parameters are CFL =0.1,α =−1.5× 105 andβ =−87.5. (b) Snapshot of flow past sphere at Re = 400 with volumetric
rendering of Q-criterion (orange and blue indicate vorticity and strain dominated areas, respectively). To capture the far-field flow features, we run this particular
simulation with a flow domain of size (10D, 4.2D, 4.2D), spatial resolution 384× 160× 160, and sphere center fixed at (2.15D, 2.1D, 2.1D). Formation of hair pin
vortex in the wake is captured, consistent with previous studies [138]. (c) Comparison of non-dimensional attached eddy length ( s/D) vs Re against experiments
(red circles) [139] and previous simulations (black line with circle markers) [138]. (d) Comparison of mean drag coe fficient (CD) vs Re against empirical (black
line) [141] and experiments (red circles) [140]. (e) Convergence: Error norms of sphereCD for Re = 100 plotted against grid spacing h. Further details can be found
under examples/3d_examples/FlowPastSphereCase folder of [100].
[15] V . Zintzen, C. D. Roberts, M. J. Anderson, A. L. Stewart, C. D. Struthers, E. S. Harvey, Hagfish predatory behaviour and slime defence mechanism, Scientific
Reports 1 (2011) 131.
[16] J. Carling, T. L. Williams, G. Bowtell, Self-propelled anguilliform swimming: simultaneous solution of the two-dimensional navier-stokes equations and
newton’s laws of motion, Journal of experimental biology 201 (1998) 3143–3166.
[17] M. Gazzola, W. M. Van Rees, P. Koumoutsakos, C-start: optimal start of larval fish, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 698 (2012) 5–18.
[18] S. Verma, G. Novati, P. Koumoutsakos, E fficient collective swimming by harnessing vortices through deep reinforcement learning, Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 115 (2018) 5849–5854.
[19] G. Novati, S. Verma, D. Alexeev, D. Rossinelli, W. M. Van Rees, P. Koumoutsakos, Synchronisation through learning for two self-propelled swimmers,
Bioinspiration & biomimetics 12 (2017) 036001.
[20] M. Bergmann, A. Iollo, Modeling and simulation of fish-like swimming, Journal of Computational Physics 230 (2011) 329–348.
[21] M. Bergmann, J. Hovnanian, A. Iollo, An accurate cartesian method for incompressible flows with moving boundaries, Communications in Computational
Physics 15 (2014) 1266–1290.
[22] M. Bergmann, A. Iollo, Bioinspired swimming simulations, Journal of Computational Physics 323 (2016) 310–321.
[23] A. Kazakidi, X. Zabulis, D. P. Tsakiris, Vision-based 3d motion reconstruction of octopus arm swimming and comparison with an 8-arm underwater robot,
in: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE, 2015, pp. 1178–1183.
[24] C. L. Hu ffard, Locomotion by abdopus aculeatus (cephalopoda: Octopodidae): walking the line between primary and secondary defenses, Journal of
experimental biology 209 (2006) 3697–3707.
[25] S. A. Mattis, C. N. Dawson, C. E. Kees, M. W. Farthing, An immersed structure approach for fluid-vegetation interaction, Advances in Water Resources 80
(2015) 1–16.
[26] J. T. Beale, A. Majda, V ortex methods. i. convergence in three dimensions, Mathematics of Computation 39 (1982) 1–27.
[27] A. Leonard, Computing three-dimensional incompressible flows with vortex elements, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 17 (1985) 523–559.
[28] P.-A. Raviart, An analysis of particle methods, in: Numerical methods in fluid dynamics, Springer, 1985, pp. 243–324.
[29] G.-H. Cottet, P. D. Koumoutsakos, et al., V ortex methods: theory and practice, volume 8, Cambridge university press Cambridge, 2000.
[30] G. Winckelmans, V ortex methods, Encyclopedia of computational mechanics (2004).
[31] P. Koumoutsakos, Multiscale flow simulations using particles, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 37 (2005) 457–487.
[32] M. Coquerelle, G.-H. Cottet, A vortex level set method for the two-way coupling of an incompressible fluid with colliding rigid bodies, Journal of
Computational Physics 227 (2008) 9121–9137.
[33] M. Gazzola, P. Chatelain, W. M. Van Rees, P. Koumoutsakos, Simulations of single and multiple swimmers with non-divergence free deforming geometries,
Journal of Computational Physics 230 (2011) 7093–7114.
[34] W. M. Van Rees, M. Gazzola, P. Koumoutsakos, Optimal shapes for anguilliform swimmers at intermediate reynolds numbers, Journal of Fluid Mechanics
23722 (2013).
[35] M. Gazzola, M. Argentina, L. Mahadevan, Scaling macroscopic aquatic locomotion, Nature Physics 10 (2014) 758–761.
[36] D. Rossinelli, B. Hejazialhosseini, W. van Rees, M. Gazzola, M. Bergdorf, P. Koumoutsakos, Mrag-i2d: Multi-resolution adapted grids for remeshed vortex
methods on multicore architectures, Journal of Computational Physics 288 (2015) 1–18.
[37] C. Bernier, M. Gazzola, R. Ronsse, P. Chatelain, Simulations of propelling and energy harvesting articulated bodies via vortex particle-mesh methods,
Journal of Computational Physics 392 (2019) 34–55.
[38] J. T. Rasmussen, G.-H. Cottet, J. H. Walther, A multiresolution remeshed vortex-in-cell algorithm using patches, Journal of Computational Physics 230
(2011) 6742–6755.
[39] M. Gazzola, B. Hejazialhosseini, P. Koumoutsakos, Reinforcement learning and wavelet adapted vortex methods for simulations of self-propelled swimmers,
SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 36 (2014) B622–B639. doi:10.1137/130943078.
[40] M. Gazzola, C. Mimeau, A. Tchieu, P. Koumoutsakos, Flow mediated interactions between two cylinders at finite re numbers, Physics of Fluids 24 (2012)
043103. doi:10.1063/1.4704195.
[41] G. Lorieul, Development and validation of a 2D V ortex Particle-Mesh method for incompressible multiphase flows, Ph.D. thesis, UCL-Universit´e Catholique
de Louvain, 2018.
[42] J. D. Eldredge, T. Colonius, A. Leonard, A vortex particle method for two-dimensional compressible flow, Journal of Computational Physics 179 (2002)
371–399.
[43] P. Parmentier, G. Winckelmans, P. Chatelain, A vortex particle-mesh method for subsonic compressible flows, Journal of Computational Physics 354 (2018)
692–716.
[44] G. Winckelmans, A. Leonard, Contributions to vortex particle methods for the computation of three-dimensional incompressible unsteady flows, Journal of
Computational Physics 109 (1993) 247–273.
[45] P. Ploumhans, G. Winckelmans, V ortex methods for high-resolution simulations of viscous flow past bluff bodies of general geometry, Journal of Computa-
tional Physics 165 (2000) 354–406.
[46] Y . Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, A remeshed vortex method for mixed rigid/soft body fluid–structure interaction, Journal of Computational Physics
444 (2021) 110577.
[47] K. Kamrin, C. H. Rycroft, J.-C. Nave, Reference map technique for finite-strain elasticity and fluid–solid interaction, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics
of Solids 60 (2012) 1952–1969.
[48] E. M. P. Cosserat, F. Cosserat, Th ´eorie des corps d´eformables, A. Hermann et fils, 1909.
[49] M. Gazzola, L. Dudte, A. McCormick, L. Mahadevan, Forward and inverse problems in the mechanics of soft filaments, Royal Society open science 5
(2018) 171628.
[50] X. Zhang, N. Naughton, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, Friction modulation in limbless, three-dimensional gaits and heterogeneous terrains, Nature commu-
nications 12 (2021) 6076.
[51] J. Yao, Q. Cao, Y . Ju, Y . Sun, R. Liu, X. Han, L. Li, Adaptive actuation of magnetic soft robots using deep reinforcement learning, Advanced Intelligent
Systems 5 (2023) 2200339.
[52] S. Ando, M. Nishikawa, M. Kaneda, K. Suga, A coupled lattice boltzmann and cosserat rod model method for three-dimensional two-way fluid–structure
interactions, AIP Advances 11 (2021) 075020.
[53] S. Tschisgale, J. Fr ¨ohlich, An immersed boundary method for the fluid-structure interaction of slender flexible structures in viscous fluid, Journal of
Computational Physics 423 (2020) 109801.
[54] A. Porat, F. Tedone, M. Palladino, P. Marcati, Y . Meroz, A general 3d model for growth dynamics of sensory-growth systems: From plants to robotics,
Frontiers in Robotics and AI 7 (2020) 89.
[55] A. Porat, A. Tekinalp, Y . Bhosale, M. Gazzola, Y . Meroz, On the mechanical origins of waving, coiling and skewing in arabidopsis thaliana roots, bioRxiv
(2023) 2023–05.
[56] N. Charles, M. Gazzola, L. Mahadevan, Topology, geometry, and mechanics of strongly stretched and twisted filaments: solenoids, plectonemes, and artificial
muscle fibers, Physical review letters 123 (2019) 208003.
[57] B. Pawlowski, J. Sun, J. Zhao, Dynamic modeling of soft manipulators actuated by twisted-and-coiled actuators, in: 2018 IEEE Conference on Decision and
Control (CDC), IEEE, 2018, pp. 409–414.
[58] D. K. Pai, S. Sueda, Q. Wei, Fast physically based musculoskeletal simulation, in: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Sketches, 2005, pp. 25–es.
[59] J. Chang, J. Pan, J. J. Zhang, Modelling rod-like flexible biological tissues for medical training, in: Modelling the Physiological Human: 3D Physiological
Human Workshop, 3DPH 2009, Zermatt, Switzerland, November 29–December 2, 2009. Proceedings, Springer, 2009, pp. 51–61.
[60] G. J. Pagan-Diaz, X. Zhang, L. Grant, Y . Kim, O. Aydin, C. Cvetkovic, E. Ko, E. Solomon, J. Hollis, H. Kong, et al., Simulation and fabrication of stronger,
larger, and faster walking biohybrid machines, Advanced Functional Materials 28 (2018) 1801145.
[61] J. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Park, I. Park, E. Kilicarslan, Y . Kim, Z. Dou, R. Bashir, M. Gazzola, Computationally assisted design and selection of maneuverable
biological walking machines, Advanced Intelligent Systems 3 (2021) 2000237.
[62] O. Weeger, Y . S. B. Kang, S.-K. Yeung, M. L. Dunn, Optimal design and manufacture of active rod structures with spatially variable materials, 3D Printing
and Additive Manufacturing 3 (2016) 204–215.
[63] J. P ´erez, B. Thomaszewski, S. Coros, B. Bickel, J. A. Canabal, R. Sumner, M. A. Otaduy, Design and fabrication of flexible rod meshes, ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 34 (2015) 1–12.
[64] G. S. Chirikjian, Conformational modeling of continuum structures in robotics and structural biology: A review, Advanced Robotics 29 (2015) 817–829.
[65] R. Welch, S. A. Harris, O. G. Harlen, D. J. Read, Kobra: a fluctuating elastic rod model for slender biological macromolecules, Soft Matter 16 (2020)
7544–7555.
[66] A. Kumar, S. Kumar, P. Gupta, A helical cauchy-born rule for special cosserat rod modeling of nano and continuum rods, Journal of Elasticity 124 (2016)
81–106.
[67] P. Gupta, A. Kumar, Phonons in chiral nanorods and nanotubes: A cosserat-rod-based continuum approach, Mathematics and Mechanics of Solids 24 (2019)
3897–3919.
[68] H.-S. Chang, U. Halder, C.-H. Shih, N. Naughton, M. Gazzola, P. G. Mehta, Energy-shaping control of a muscular octopus arm moving in three dimensions,
Proceedings of the Royal Society A 479 (2023) 20220593.
[69] T. Wang, U. Halder, E. Gribkova, R. Gillette, M. Gazzola, P. G. Mehta, A sensory feedback control law for octopus arm movements, in: 2022 IEEE 61st
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1059–1066.
[70] T. Wang, U. Halder, E. Gribkova, M. Gazzola, P. G. Mehta, Control-oriented modeling of bend propagation in an octopus arm, in: 2022 American Control
Conference (ACC), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1359–1366.
[71] H.-S. Chang, U. Halder, E. Gribkova, A. Tekinalp, N. Naughton, M. Gazzola, P. G. Mehta, Controlling a cyberoctopus soft arm with muscle-like actuation,
in: 2021 60th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), IEEE, 2021, pp. 1383–1390.
24[72] N. Naughton, J. Sun, A. Tekinalp, T. Parthasarathy, G. Chowdhary, M. Gazzola, Elastica: A compliant mechanics environment for soft robotic control, IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters 6 (2021) 3389–3396.
[73] C.-H. Shih, N. Naughton, U. Halder, H.-S. Chang, S. H. Kim, R. Gillette, P. G. Mehta, M. Gazzola, Hierarchical control and learning of a foraging
cyberoctopus, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.05811 (2023).
[74] M. Gazzola, L. Dudte, A. McCormick, L. Mahadevan, Forward and inverse problems in the mechanics of soft filaments, Royal Society open science 5
(2018) 171628.
[75] Y . Bhosale, A. Tekinalp, MagnetoPyElastica: Open-source software for simulating magnetic Cosserat rods, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.7658892. doi:10.5281/zenodo.7658892.
[76] C. S. Peskin, Flow patterns around heart valves: a numerical method, Journal of computational physics 10 (1972) 252–271.
[77] W.-X. Huang, F.-B. Tian, Recent trends and progress in the immersed boundary method, Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part C:
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science 233 (2019) 7617–7636.
[78] J. Han, C. S. Peskin, Spontaneous oscillation and fluid–structure interaction of cilia, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (2018) 4417–
4422.
[79] P. Jayathilake, Z. Tan, D. Le, H. Lee, B. Khoo, Three-dimensional numerical simulations of human pulmonary cilia in the periciliary liquid layer by the
immersed boundary method, Computers & Fluids 67 (2012) 130–137.
[80] X. Yuan-Qing, T. Xiao-Ying, T. Fang-Bao, P. Yu-Hua, X. Yong, Z. Yan-Jun, Ib–lbm simulation of the haemocyte dynamics in a stenotic capillary, Computer
Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering 17 (2014) 978–985.
[81] M. D. de Tullio, P. De Palma, G. Iaccarino, G. Pascazio, M. Napolitano, An immersed boundary method for compressible flows using local grid refinement,
Journal of Computational Physics 225 (2007) 2098–2117.
[82] D. Goldstein, R. Handler, L. Sirovich, Modeling a no-slip flow boundary with an external force field, Journal of computational physics 105 (1993) 354–366.
[83] Y . Kim, C. S. Peskin, Penalty immersed boundary method for an elastic boundary with mass, Physics of Fluids 19 (2007) 053103.
[84] W.-X. Huang, S. J. Shin, H. J. Sung, Simulation of flexible filaments in a uniform flow by the immersed boundary method, Journal of computational physics
226 (2007) 2206–2228.
[85] F.-B. Tian, H. Dai, H. Luo, J. F. Doyle, B. Rousseau, Fluid–structure interaction involving large deformations: 3d simulations and applications to biological
systems, Journal of computational physics 258 (2014) 451–469.
[86] Y . Kim, C. S. Peskin, A penalty immersed boundary method for a rigid body in fluid, Physics of Fluids 28 (2016) 033603.
[87] R. Mittal, G. Iaccarino, Immersed boundary methods, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech. 37 (2005) 239–261.
[88] Y . Kim, C. S. Peskin, Numerical study of incompressible fluid dynamics with nonuniform density by the immersed boundary method, Physics of Fluids 20
(2008) 062101.
[89] W.-X. Huang, W. Guo, An improved penalty immersed boundary method for multiphase flow simulation, International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Fluids 88 (2018) 447–462.
[90] R. Hockney, J. Eastwood, Computer Simulation Using Particles, CRC press, 1989.
[91] C. S. Peskin, The immersed boundary method, Acta numerica 11 (2002) 479–517.
[92] X.-D. Liu, S. Osher, T. Chan, et al., Weighted essentially non-oscillatory schemes, Journal of computational physics 115 (1994) 200–212.
[93] M. Mortensen, Massively parallel implementation in python of a pseudo-spectral dns code for turbulent flows, arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.00850 (2016).
[94] H. Jeanmart, G. Winckelmans, Investigation of eddy-viscosity models modified using discrete filters: a simplified “regularized variational multiscale model”
and an “enhanced field model”, Physics of fluids 19 (2007) 055110.
[95] A. Tekinalp, S. H. Kim, Y . Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, N. Naughton, M. St¨olzle, Z. Dou, C.-H. C. Shih, M. Gazzola, PyElastica: Open-source software for the
simulation of assemblies of slender, one- dimensional structures using Cosserat Rod theory, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7658872.
doi:10.5281/zenodo.7658872.
[96] J. Till, D. C. Rucker, Elastic rod dynamics: Validation of a real-time implicit approach, in: 2017 IEEE /RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 3013–3019.
[97] B. S. Massey, J. Ward-Smith, Mechanics of fluids, volume 1, Crc Press, 1998.
[98] S. Turek, J. Hron, Proposal for numerical benchmarking of fluid-structure interaction between an elastic object and laminar incompressible flow, Springer,
2006.
[99] J. Silva-Leon, A. Cioncolini, A. Filippone, Determination of the normal fluid load on inclined cylinders from optical measurements of the reconfiguration of
flexible filaments in flow, Journal of Fluids and Structures 76 (2018) 488–505.
[100] Y . Bhosale, A. Tekinalp, S. Cui, F. K. Chan, M. Gazzola, Scalable One-stop Platform for Hydroelastic Things (SOPHT), 2023. URL: https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.7658908. doi:10.5281/zenodo.7658908.
[101] J. Silva-Leon, A. Cioncolini, A. Filippone, Determination of the normal fluid load on inclined cylinders from optical measurements of the reconfiguration of
flexible filaments in flow, Journal of Fluids and Structures 76 (2018) 488–505.
[102] S. Kern, P. Koumoutsakos, Simulations of optimized anguilliform swimming, Journal of Experimental Biology 209 (2006) 4841–4857.
[103] F. K. Chan, Y . Bhosale, M. Gazzola, Scalable one-stop platform for hydroelastic things (sopht) mpi, 2023. URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
7659153. doi:10.5281/zenodo.7659153.
[104] S. Alben, M. J. Shelley, Flapping states of a flag in an inviscid fluid: bistability and the transition to chaos, Physical review letters 100 (2008) 074301.
[105] M. Chen, L.-B. Jia, Y .-F. Wu, X.-Z. Yin, Y .-B. Ma, Bifurcation and chaos of a flag in an inviscid flow, Journal of Fluids and Structures 45 (2014) 124–137.
[106] D. Stanzione, B. Barth, N. Ga ffney, K. Gaither, C. Hempel, T. Minyard, S. Mehringer, E. Wernert, H. Tufo, D. Panda, et al., Stampede 2: The evolution of an
xsede supercomputer, in: Proceedings of the Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing 2017 on Sustainability, Success and Impact, 2017,
pp. 1–8.
[107] I. F. Sbalzarini, J. H. Walther, M. Bergdorf, S. E. Hieber, E. M. Kotsalis, P. Koumoutsakos, Ppm–a highly e fficient parallel particle–mesh library for the
simulation of continuum systems, Journal of Computational Physics 215 (2006) 566–588.
[108] B. R. Lutz, J. Chen, D. T. Schwartz, Microfluidics without microfabrication, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 100 (2003) 4395–4398.
[109] P. Marmottant, S. Hilgenfeldt, Controlled vesicle deformation and lysis by single oscillating bubbles, Nature 423 (2003) 153–156.
[110] C. Wang, S. V . Jalikop, S. Hilgenfeldt, Size-sensitive sorting of microparticles through control of flow geometry, Applied Physics Letters 99 (2011) 034101.
[111] K. Chong, S. D. Kelly, S. Smith, J. D. Eldredge, Inertial particle trapping in viscous streaming, Physics of Fluids 25 (2013) 033602.
[112] R. Thameem, B. Rallabandi, S. Hilgenfeldt, Fast inertial particle manipulation in oscillating flows, Physical Review Fluids 2 (2017) 052001.
[113] T. Parthasarathy, F. K. Chan, M. Gazzola, Streaming-enhanced flow-mediated transport, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 878 (2019) 647–662.
[114] Y . Bhosale, G. Vishwanathan, G. Upadhyay, T. Parthasarathy, G. Juarez, M. Gazzola, Multicurvature viscous streaming: Flow topology and particle
manipulation, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (2022) e2120538119.
[115] Y . Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, Shape curvature e ffects in viscous streaming, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 898 (2020) A13. doi: 10.1017/jfm.
2020.404.
25[116] F. K. Chan, Y . Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, Three-dimensional geometry and topology e ffects in viscous streaming, Journal of Fluid Mechanics
933 (2022) A53.
[117] S. Cui, Y . Bhosale, M. Gazzola, Three-dimensional soft streaming, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 979 (2024) A7. doi: 10.1017/jfm.2023.1050.
[118] Y . Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, M. Gazzola, Soft streaming – flow rectification via elastic boundaries, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 945 (2022) R1.
[119] Z. Dou, L. Hong, Z. Li, F. K. Chan, Y . Bhosale, O. Aydin, G. Juarez, M. T. A. Saif, L. P. Chamorro, M. Gazzola, An in vitro living system for flow
rectification, arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14479 (2022).
[120] C. Brennen, H. Winet, Fluid mechanics of propulsion by cilia and flagella, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 9 (1977) 339–398.
[121] A. Bertelsen, A. Svardal, S. Tjøtta, Nonlinear streaming e ffects associated with oscillating cylinders, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 59 (1973) 493–511.
[122] V . Sahadevan, B. Panigrahi, C.-Y . Chen, Microfluidic applications of artificial cilia: Recent progress, demonstration, and future perspectives, Micromachines
13 (2022) 735.
[123] A. Kazakidi, D. P. Tsakiris, D. Angelidis, F. Sotiropoulos, J. A. Ekaterinaris, Cfd study of aquatic thrust generation by an octopus-like arm under intense
prescribed deformations, Computers & Fluids 115 (2015) 54–65.
[124] F. Renda, F. Giorgio-Serchi, F. Boyer, C. Laschi, J. Dias, L. Seneviratne, A unified multi-soft-body dynamic model for underwater soft robots, The
International Journal of Robotics Research 37 (2018) 648–666.
[125] W. M. Kier, N. A. Curtin, Fast muscle in squid (loligo pealei): contractile properties of a specialized muscle fibre type, Journal of Experimental Biology 205
(2002) 1907–1916.
[126] F. Tramacere, A. Kovalev, T. Kleinteich, S. N. Gorb, B. Mazzolai, Structure and mechanical properties of octopus vulgaris suckers, Journal of The Royal
Society Interface 11 (2014) 20130816.
[127] M. Wells, J. Wells, Observations on the feeding, growth rate and habits of newly settled octopus cyanea, Journal of Zoology 161 (1970) 65–74.
[128] S. Xu, Z. J. Wang, An immersed interface method for simulating the interaction of a fluid with moving boundaries, Journal of Computational Physics 216
(2006) 454–493.
[129] C. Jiang, J.-Y . Yao, Z.-Q. Zhang, G.-J. Gao, G. Liu, A sharp-interface immersed smoothed finite element method for interactions between incompressible
flows and large deformation solids, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 340 (2018) 24–53.
[130] J. Gabbard, W. M. van Rees, A high-order 3d immersed interface finite di fference method for the advection-diffusion equation, in: AIAA SCITECH 2023
Forum, 2023, p. 2480.
[131] D. Kolomenskiy, K. Schneider, A fourier spectral method for the navier–stokes equations with volume penalization for moving solid obstacles, Journal of
Computational Physics 228 (2009) 5687–5709.
[132] A. Goza, T. Colonius, A strongly-coupled immersed-boundary formulation for thin elastic structures, Journal of Computational Physics 336 (2017) 401–411.
[133] L. Dalcin, Y .-L. L. Fang, mpi4py: Status update after 12 years of development, Computing in Science & Engineering 23 (2021) 47–54.
[134] L. D. Dalcin, R. R. Paz, P. A. Kler, A. Cosimo, Parallel distributed computing using python, Advances in Water Resources 34 (2011) 1124–1139.
[135] L. Dalc ´ın, R. Paz, M. Storti, Mpi for python, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 65 (2005) 1108–1115.
[136] L. Dalc ´ın, R. Paz, M. Storti, J. D’El´ıa, Mpi for python: Performance improvements and mpi-2 extensions, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing 68
(2008) 655–662.
[137] L. Dalcin, M. Mortensen, D. E. Keyes, Fast parallel multidimensional fft using advanced mpi, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing (2019).
doi:10.1016/j.jpdc.2019.02.006.
[138] T. Johnson, V . Patel, Flow past a sphere up to a reynolds number of 300, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 378 (1999) 19–70.
[139] S. Taneda, Experimental investigation of the wake behind a sphere at low reynolds numbers, Journal of the physical society of Japan 11 (1956) 1104–1108.
[140] F. W. Roos, W. W. Willmarth, Some experimental results on sphere and disk drag, AIAA journal 9 (1971) 285–291.
[141] Uber die grundlegenden berechnungen bei der schwerkraftaufbereitung, Z. Vereines Deutscher Inge. 77 (1933) 318–321.
26